ITEM 43: PREFER METHOD REFERENCES TO LAMBDAS
197
Item 43: Prefer method references to lambdas
The primary advantage of lambdas over anonymous classes is that they are more
succinct. Java provides a way to generate function objects even more succinct than
lambdas: method references. Here is a code snippet from a program that maintains
a map from arbitrary keys to Integer values. If the value is interpreted as a count
of the number of instances of the key, then the program is a multiset implementation.
The function of the code snippet is to associate the number 1 with the key if it is not
in the map and to increment the associated value if the key is already present:
map.merge(key, 1, (count, incr) -> count + incr);
Note that this code uses the merge method, which was added to the Map
interface in Java 8. If no mapping is present for the given key, the method simply
inserts the given value; if a mapping is already present, merge applies the given
function to the current value and the given value and overwrites the current value
with the result. This code represents a typical use case for the merge method.
The code reads nicely, but there’s still some boilerplate. The parameters count
and incr don’t add much value, and they take up a fair amount of space. Really,
all the lambda tells you is that the function returns the sum of its two arguments.
As of Java 8, Integer (and all the other boxed numerical primitive types) pro-
vides a static method sum that does exactly the same thing. We can simply pass a
reference to this method and get the same result with less visual clutter:
map.merge(key, 1, Integer::sum);
The more parameters a method has, the more boilerplate you can eliminate with a
method reference. In some lambdas, however, the parameter names you choose
provide useful documentation, making the lambda more readable and maintain-
able than a method reference, even if the lambda is longer.
There’s nothing you can do with a method reference that you can’t also do
with a lambda (with one obscure exception—see JLS, 9.9-2 if you’re curious).
That said, method references usually result in shorter, clearer code. They also give
you an out if a lambda gets too long or complex: You can extract the code from the
lambda into a new method and replace the lambda with a reference to that method.
You can give the method a good name and document it to your heart’s content.
If you’re programming with an IDE, it will offer to replace a lambda with a
method reference wherever it can. You should usually, but not always, take the
IDE up on the offer. Occasionally, a lambda will be more succinct than a method
reference. This happens most often when the method is in the same class as the