CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
296
Item 70: Use checked exceptions for recoverable conditions and
runtime exceptions for programming errors
Java provides three kinds of throwables: checked exceptions, runtime exceptions, and
errors. There is some confusion among programmers as to when it is appropriate to
use each kind of throwable. While the decision is not always clear-cut, there are some
general rules that provide strong guidance.
The cardinal rule in deciding whether to use a checked or an unchecked
exception is this: use checked exceptions for conditions from which the caller
can reasonably be expected to recover. By throwing a checked exception, you
force the caller to handle the exception in a catch clause or to propagate it
outward. Each checked exception that a method is declared to throw is therefore a
potent indication to the API user that the associated condition is a possible
outcome of invoking the method.
By confronting the user with a checked exception, the API designer presents a
mandate to recover from the condition. The user can disregard the mandate by
catching the exception and ignoring it, but this is usually a bad idea (Item 77).
There are two kinds of unchecked throwables: runtime exceptions and errors.
They are identical in their behavior: both are throwables that needn’t, and
generally shouldn’t, be caught. If a program throws an unchecked exception or an
error, it is generally the case that recovery is impossible and continued execution
would do more harm than good. If a program does not catch such a throwable, it
will cause the current thread to halt with an appropriate error message.
Use runtime exceptions to indicate programming errors. The great major-
ity of runtime exceptions indicate precondition violations. A precondition viola-
tion is simply a failure by the client of an API to adhere to the contract established
by the API specification. For example, the contract for array access specifies that
the array index must be between zero and the array length minus one, inclusive.
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException indicates that this precondition was violated.
One problem with this advice is that it is not always clear whether you’re
dealing with a recoverable conditions or a programming error. For example,
consider the case of resource exhaustion, which can be caused by a programming
error such as allocating an unreasonably large array, or by a genuine shortage of
resources. If resource exhaustion is caused by a temporary shortage or by
temporarily heightened demand, the condition may well be recoverable. It is a
matter of judgment on the part of the API designer whether a given instance of
resource exhaustion is likely to allow for recovery. If you believe a condition is
likely to allow for recovery, use a checked exception; if not, use a runtime