ITEM 52: USE OVERLOADING JUDICIOUSLY
243
difference because all overloadings of println return void, so the method
reference couldn’t possibly be a Callable. This makes perfect sense, but it’s not
the way the overload resolution algorithm works. Perhaps equally surprising is
that the submit method invocation would be legal if the println method weren’t
also overloaded. It is the combination of the overloading of the referenced method
(println) and the invoked method (submit) that prevents the overload resolution
algorithm from behaving as you’d expect.
Technically speaking, the problem is that System.out::println is an inexact
method reference [JLS, 15.13.1] and that “certain argument expressions that
contain implicitly typed lambda expressions or inexact method references are
ignored by the applicability tests, because their meaning cannot be determined
until a target type is selected [JLS, 15.12.2].” Don’t worry if you don’t understand
this passage; it is aimed at compiler writers. The key point is that overloading
methods or constructors with different functional interfaces in the same argument
position causes confusion. Therefore, do not overload methods to take different
functional interfaces in the same argument position. In the parlance of this
item, different functional interfaces are not radically different. The Java compiler
will warn you about this sort of problematic overload if you pass the command
line switch -Xlint:overloads.
Array types and class types other than Object are radically different. Also,
array types and interface types other than Serializable and Cloneable are
radically different. Two distinct classes are said to be unrelated if neither class is a
descendant of the other [JLS, 5.5]. For example, String and Throwable are
unrelated. It is impossible for any object to be an instance of two unrelated
classes, so unrelated classes are radically different, too.
There are other pairs of types that can’t be converted in either direction [JLS,
5.1.12], but once you go beyond the simple cases described above, it becomes very
difficult for most programmers to discern which, if any, overloading applies to a
set of actual parameters. The rules that determine which overloading is selected
are extremely complex and grow more complex with every release. Few program-
mers understand all of their subtleties.
There may be times when you feel the need to violate the guidelines in this
item, especially when evolving existing classes. For example, consider String,
which has had a contentEquals(StringBuffer) method since Java 4. In Java 5,
CharSequence was added to provide a common interface for StringBuffer,
StringBuilder, String, CharBuffer, and other similar types. At the same time
that CharSequence was added, String was outfitted with an overloading of the
contentEquals method that takes a CharSequence.