339
C H A P T E R 12
Serialization
THIS chapter concerns object serialization, which is Java’s framework for
encoding objects as byte streams (serializing) and reconstructing objects from
their encodings (deserializing). Once an object has been serialized, its encoding
can be sent from one VM to another or stored on disk for later deserialization. This
chapter focuses on the dangers of serialization and how to minimize them.
Item 85: Prefer alternatives to Java serialization
When serialization was added to Java in 1997, it was known to be somewhat risky.
The approach had been tried in a research language (Modula-3) but never in a
production language. While the promise of distributed objects with little effort on
the part of the programmer was appealing, the price was invisible constructors and
blurred lines between API and implementation, with the potential for problems
with correctness, performance, security, and maintenance. Proponents believed
the benefits outweighed the risks, but history has shown otherwise.
The security issues described in previous editions of this book turned out to be
every bit as serious as some had feared. The vulnerabilities discussed in the early
2000s were transformed into serious exploits over the next decade, famously
including a ransomware attack on the San Francisco Metropolitan Transit Agency
Municipal Railway (SFMTA Muni) that shut down the entire fare collection
system for two days in November 2016 [Gallagher16].
A fundamental problem with serialization is that its attack surface is too big to
protect, and constantly growing: Object graphs are deserialized by invoking the
readObject method on an ObjectInputStream. This method is essentially a
magic constructor that can be made to instantiate objects of almost any type on the
class path, so long as the type implements the Serializable interface. In the
process of deserializing a byte stream, this method can execute code from any of
these types, so the code for all of these types is part of the attack surface.