CHAPTER 11
CONCURRENCY
328
A few more details bear noting. The executor passed to the time method must
allow for the creation of at least as many threads as the given concurrency level, or
the test will never complete. This is known as a thread starvation deadlock
[Goetz06, 8.1.1]. If a worker thread catches an InterruptedException, it
reasserts the interrupt using the idiom Thread.currentThread().interrupt()
and returns from its run method. This allows the executor to deal with the interrupt
as it sees fit. Note that System.nanoTime is used to time the activity. For interval
timing, always use System.nanoTime rather than System.currentTimeMillis.
System.nanoTime is both more accurate and more precise and is unaffected by
adjustments to the system’s real-time clock. Finally, note that the code in this
example won’t yield accurate timings unless action does a fair amount of work,
say a second or more. Accurate microbenchmarking is notoriously hard and is best
done with the aid of a specialized framework such as jmh [JMH].
This item only scratches the surface of what you can do with the concurrency
utilities. For example, the three countdown latches in the previous example could
be replaced by a single CyclicBarrier or Phaser instance. The resulting code
would be a bit more concise but perhaps more difficult to understand. 
While you should always use the concurrency utilities in preference to wait
and notify, you might have to maintain legacy code that uses wait and notify.
The wait method is used to make a thread wait for some condition. It must be
invoked inside a synchronized region that locks the object on which it is invoked.
Here is the standard idiom for using the wait method:
// The standard idiom for using the wait method
synchronized (obj) {
while (<condition does not hold>)
obj.wait(); // (Releases lock, and reacquires on wakeup)
... // Perform action appropriate to condition
}
Always use the wait loop idiom to invoke the wait method; never invoke it
outside of a loop. The loop serves to test the condition before and after waiting.
Testing the condition before waiting and skipping the wait if the condition
already holds are necessary to ensure liveness. If the condition already holds and
the notify (or notifyAll) method has already been invoked before a thread
waits, there is no guarantee that the thread will ever wake from the wait.
Testing the condition after waiting and waiting again if the condition does not
hold are necessary to ensure safety. If the thread proceeds with the action when
the condition does not hold, it can destroy the invariant guarded by the lock. There
are several reasons a thread might wake up when the condition does not hold: