ITEM 19: DESIGN AND DOCUMENT FOR INHERITANCE OR ELSE PROHIBIT IT
97
subclass’s state has been deserialized. In the case of clone, the overriding method
will run before the subclass’s clone method has a chance to fix the clone’s state.
In either case, a program failure is likely to follow. In the case of clone, the failure
can damage the original object as well as the clone. This can happen, for example,
if the overriding method assumes it is modifying the clone’s copy of the object’s
deep structure, but the copy hasn’t been made yet.
Finally, if you decide to implement Serializable in a class designed for
inheritance and the class has a readResolve or writeReplace method, you must
make the readResolve or writeReplace method protected rather than private. If
these methods are private, they will be silently ignored by subclasses. This is one
more case where an implementation detail becomes part of a class’s API to permit
inheritance.
By now it should be apparent that designing a class for inheritance requires
great effort and places substantial limitations on the class. This is not a
decision to be undertaken lightly. There are some situations where it is clearly the
right thing to do, such as abstract classes, including skeletal implementations of
interfaces (Item 20). There are other situations where it is clearly the wrong thing
to do, such as immutable classes (Item 17).
But what about ordinary concrete classes? Traditionally, they are neither final
nor designed and documented for subclassing, but this state of affairs is danger-
ous. Each time a change is made in such a class, there is a chance that subclasses
extending the class will break. This is not just a theoretical problem. It is not
uncommon to receive subclassing-related bug reports after modifying the internals
of a nonfinal concrete class that was not designed and documented for inheritance.
The best solution to this problem is to prohibit subclassing in classes that
are not designed and documented to be safely subclassed. There are two ways
to prohibit subclassing. The easier of the two is to declare the class final. The
alternative is to make all the constructors private or package-private and to add
public static factories in place of the constructors. This alternative, which provides
the flexibility to use subclasses internally, is discussed in Item 17. Either approach
is acceptable.
This advice may be somewhat controversial because many programmers have
grown accustomed to subclassing ordinary concrete classes to add facilities such
as instrumentation, notification, and synchronization or to limit functionality. If a
class implements some interface that captures its essence, such as Set, List, or
Map, then you should feel no compunction about prohibiting subclassing. The
wrapper class pattern, described in Item 18, provides a superior alternative to
inheritance for augmenting the functionality.