ITEM 86: IMPLEMENT SERIALIZABLE WITH GREAT CAUTION
345
Classes designed for inheritance that do implement Serializable include
Throwable and Component. Throwable implements Serializable so RMI can
send exceptions from server to client. Component implements Serializable so
GUIs can be sent, saved, and restored, but even in the heyday of Swing and AWT,
this facility was little-used in practice.
If you implement a class with instance fields that is both serializable and
extendable, there are several risks to be aware of. If there are any invariants on the
instance field values, it is critical to prevent subclasses from overriding the
finalize method, which the class can do by overriding finalize and declaring it
final. Otherwise, the class will be susceptible to finalizer attacks (Item 8). Finally,
if the class has invariants that would be violated if its instance fields were
initialized to their default values (zero for integral types, false for boolean, and
null for object reference types), you must add this readObjectNoData method:
// readObjectNoData for stateful extendable serializable classes
private void readObjectNoData() throws InvalidObjectException {
    throw new InvalidObjectException("Stream data required");
}
This method was added in Java 4 to cover a corner case involving the addition of a
serializable superclass to an existing serializable class [Serialization, 3.5]. 
There is one caveat regarding the decision not to implement Serializable. If
a class designed for inheritance is not serializable, it may require extra effort to
write a serializable subclass. Normal deserialization of such a class requires the
superclass to have an accessible parameterless constructor [Serialization, 1.10]. If
you don’t provide such a constructor, subclasses are forced to use the serialization
proxy pattern (Item 90).
Inner classes (Item 24) should not implement Serializable. They use
compiler-generated synthetic fields to store references to enclosing instances and
to store values of local variables from enclosing scopes. How these fields corre-
spond to the class definition is unspecified, as are the names of anonymous and
local classes. Therefore, the default serialized form of an inner class is ill-defined.
A static member class can, however, implement Serializable.
To summarize, the ease of implementing Serializable is specious. Unless a
class is to be used only in a protected environment where versions will never have
to interoperate and servers will never be exposed to untrusted data, implementing
Serializable is a serious commitment that should be made with great care. Extra
caution is warranted if a class permits inheritance.