CHAPTER 6
ENUMS AND ANNOTATIONS
180
Item 39: Prefer annotations to naming patterns
Historically, it was common to use naming patterns to indicate that some program
elements demanded special treatment by a tool or framework. For example, prior
to release 4, the JUnit testing framework required its users to designate test meth-
ods by beginning their names with the characters test [Beck04]. This technique
works, but it has several big disadvantages. First, typographical errors result in
silent failures. For example, suppose you accidentally named a test method
tsetSafetyOverride instead of testSafetyOverride. JUnit 3 wouldn’t com-
plain, but it wouldn’t execute the test either, leading to a false sense of security.
A second disadvantage of naming patterns is that there is no way to ensure
that they are used only on appropriate program elements. For example, suppose
you called a class TestSafetyMechanisms in hopes that JUnit 3 would automati-
cally test all of its methods, regardless of their names. Again, JUnit 3 wouldn’t
complain, but it wouldn’t execute the tests either.
A third disadvantage of naming patterns is that they provide no good way to
associate parameter values with program elements. For example, suppose you
want to support a category of test that succeeds only if it throws a particular
exception. The exception type is essentially a parameter of the test. You could
encode the exception type name into the test method name using some elaborate
naming pattern, but this would be ugly and fragile (Item 62). The compiler would
have no way of knowing to check that the string that was supposed to name an
exception actually did. If the named class didn’t exist or wasn’t an exception, you
wouldn’t find out until you tried to run the test.
Annotations [JLS, 9.7] solve all of these problems nicely, and JUnit adopted
them starting with release 4. In this item, we’ll write our own toy testing frame-
work to show how annotations work. Suppose you want to define an annotation
type to designate simple tests that are run automatically and fail if they throw an
exception. Here’s how such an annotation type, named Test, might look:
// Marker annotation type declaration
import java.lang.annotation.*;
/**
 * Indicates that the annotated method is a test method.
 * Use only on parameterless static methods.
 */
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Target(ElementType.METHOD)
public @interface Test {
}