ITEM 56: WRITE DOC COMMENTS FOR ALL EXPOSED API ELEMENTS
257
The first “sentence” of each doc comment (as defined below) becomes the
summary description of the element to which the comment pertains. For example,
the summary description in the doc comment on page 255 is “Returns the element
at the specified position in this list.” The summary description must stand on its
own to describe the functionality of the element it summarizes. To avoid confu-
sion, no two members or constructors in a class or interface should have the
same summary description. Pay particular attention to overloadings, for which it
is often natural to use the same first sentence (but unacceptable in doc comments).
Be careful if the intended summary description contains a period, because the
period can prematurely terminate the description. For example, a doc comment that
begins with the phrase “A college degree, such as B.S., M.S. or Ph.D.” will
result in the summary description “A college degree, such as B.S., M.S.” The
problem is that the summary description ends at the first period that is followed by
a space, tab, or line terminator (or at the first block tag) [Javadoc-ref]. Here, the
second period in the abbreviation “M.S.” is followed by a space. The best solution
is to surround the offending period and any associated text with an {@literal}
tag, so the period is no longer followed by a space in the source code:
/**
 * A college degree, such as B.S., {@literal M.S.} or Ph.D.
 */
public class Degree { ... }
It is a bit misleading to say that the summary description is the first sentence in
a doc comment. Convention dictates that it should seldom be a complete sentence.
For methods and constructors, the summary description should be a verb phrase
(including any object) describing the action performed by the method. For example:
• ArrayList(int initialCapacity)—Constructs an empty list with the spec-
ified initial capacity.
• Collection.size()—Returns the number of elements in this collection.
As shown in these examples, use the third person declarative tense (“returns the
number”) rather than the second person imperative (“return the number”).
For classes, interfaces, and fields, the summary description should be a noun
phrase describing the thing represented by an instance of the class or interface or
by the field itself. For example:
• Instant—An instantaneous point on the time-line.
• Math.PI—The double value that is closer than any other to pi, the ratio of the
circumference of a circle to its diameter.