CHAPTER 3
METHODS COMMON TO ALL OBJECTS
46
NullPointerException. The general contract prohibits this. Many classes have
equals methods that guard against it with an explicit test for null:
@Override public boolean equals(Object o) {
if (o == null)
return false;
...
}
This test is unnecessary. To test its argument for equality, the equals method must
first cast its argument to an appropriate type so its accessors can be invoked or its
fields accessed. Before doing the cast, the method must use the instanceof oper-
ator to check that its argument is of the correct type:
@Override public boolean equals(Object o) {
if (!(o instanceof MyType))
return false;
MyType mt = (MyType) o;
...
}
If this type check were missing and the equals method were passed an argument
of the wrong type, the equals method would throw a ClassCastException,
which violates the equals contract. But the instanceof operator is specified to
return false if its first operand is null, regardless of what type appears in the
second operand [JLS, 15.20.2]. Therefore, the type check will return false if
null is passed in, so you don’t need an explicit null check. 
Putting it all together, here’s a recipe for a high-quality equals method:
1. Use the == operator to check if the argument is a reference to this object.
If so, return true. This is just a performance optimization but one that is worth
doing if the comparison is potentially expensive.
2. Use the instanceof operator to check if the argument has the correct type.
If not, return false. Typically, the correct type is the class in which the method
occurs. Occasionally, it is some interface implemented by this class. Use an
interface if the class implements an interface that refines the equals contract
to permit comparisons across classes that implement the interface. Collection
interfaces such as Set, List, Map, and Map.Entry have this property.
3. Cast the argument to the correct type. Because this cast was preceded by an
instanceof test, it is guaranteed to succeed.