CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
222
Item 48: Use caution when making streams parallel
Among mainstream languages, Java has always been at the forefront of providing
facilities to ease the task of concurrent programming. When Java was released in
1996, it had built-in support for threads, with synchronization and wait/notify.
Java 5 introduced the java.util.concurrent library, with concurrent collections
and the executor framework. Java 7 introduced the fork-join package, a high-
performance framework for parallel decomposition. Java 8 introduced streams,
which can be parallelized with a single call to the parallel method. Writing con-
current programs in Java keeps getting easier, but writing concurrent programs
that are correct and fast is as difficult as it ever was. Safety and liveness violations
are a fact of life in concurrent programming, and parallel stream pipelines are no
exception.
Consider this program from Item 45:
// Stream-based program to generate the first 20 Mersenne primes
public static void main(String[] args) {
    primes().map(p -> TWO.pow(p.intValueExact()).subtract(ONE))
        .filter(mersenne -> mersenne.isProbablePrime(50))
        .limit(20)
        .forEach(System.out::println);
}
static Stream<BigInteger> primes() {
    return Stream.iterate(TWO, BigInteger::nextProbablePrime);
}
On my machine, this program immediately starts printing primes and takes
12.5 seconds to run to completion. Suppose I naively try to speed it up by adding a
call to parallel() to the stream pipeline. What do you think will happen to its
performance? Will it get a few percent faster? A few percent slower? Sadly, what
happens is that it doesn’t print anything, but CPU usage spikes to 90 percent and
stays there indefinitely (a liveness failure). The program might terminate eventu-
ally, but I was unwilling to find out; I stopped it forcibly after half an hour.
What’s going on here? Simply put, the streams library has no idea how to par-
allelize this pipeline and the heuristics fail. Even under the best of circumstances,
parallelizing a pipeline is unlikely to increase its performance if the source is
from Stream.iterate, or the intermediate operation limit is used. This pipe-
line has to contend with both of these issues. Worse, the default parallelization
strategy deals with the unpredictability of limit by assuming there’s no harm in
processing a few extra elements and discarding any unneeded results. In this case,