CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
304
Item 74: Document all exceptions thrown by each method
A description of the exceptions thrown by a method is an important part of the doc-
umentation required to use the method properly. Therefore, it is critically important
that you take the time to carefully document all of the exceptions thrown by each
method (Item 56).
Always declare checked exceptions individually, and document precisely
the conditions under which each one is thrown using the Javadoc @throws tag.
Don’t take the shortcut of declaring that a method throws some superclass of
multiple exception classes that it can throw. As an extreme example, don’t declare
that a public method throws Exception or, worse, throws Throwable. In addition
to denying any guidance to the method’s user concerning the exceptions it is
capable of throwing, such a declaration greatly hinders the use of the method
because it effectively obscures any other exception that may be thrown in the same
context. One exception to this advice is the main method, which can safely be
declared to throw Exception because it is called only by VM.
While the language does not require programmers to declare the unchecked
exceptions that a method is capable of throwing, it is wise to document them as
carefully as the checked exceptions. Unchecked exceptions generally represent
programming errors (Item 70), and familiarizing programmers with all of the
errors they can make helps them avoid making these errors. A well-documented
list of the unchecked exceptions that a method can throw effectively describes the
preconditions for its successful execution. It is essential that every public
method’s documentation describe its preconditions (Item 56), and documenting its
unchecked exceptions is the best way to satisfy this requirement.
It is particularly important that methods in interfaces document the unchecked
exceptions they may throw. This documentation forms a part of the interface’s
general contract and enables common behavior among multiple implementations
of the interface.
Use the Javadoc @throws tag to document each exception that a method
can throw, but do not use the throws keyword on unchecked exceptions. It is
important that programmers using your API are aware of which exceptions are
checked and which are unchecked because the programmers’ responsibilities
differ in these two cases. The documentation generated by the Javadoc @throws
tag without a corresponding throws clause in the method declaration provides a
strong visual cue to the programmer that an exception is unchecked.