CHAPTER 12
SERIALIZATION
342
efficient; and that JSON is exclusively a data representation, whereas protobuf
offers schemas (types) to document and enforce appropriate usage. Although
protobuf is more efficient than JSON, JSON is extremely efficient for a text-based
representation. And while protobuf is a binary representation, it does provide an
alternative text representation for use where human-readability is desired (pbtxt).
If you can’t avoid Java serialization entirely, perhaps because you’re working
in the context of a legacy system that requires it, your next best alternative is to
never deserialize untrusted data. In particular, you should never accept RMI
traffic from untrusted sources. The official secure coding guidelines for Java say
“Deserialization of untrusted data is inherently dangerous and should be avoided.”
This sentence is set in large, bold, italic, red type, and it is the only text in the
entire document that gets this treatment [Java-secure].
If you can’t avoid serialization and you aren’t absolutely certain of the safety
of the data you’re deserializing, use the object deserialization filtering added in
Java 9 and backported to earlier releases (java.io.ObjectInputFilter). This
facility lets you specify a filter that is applied to data streams before they’re
deserialized. It operates at the class granularity, letting you accept or reject certain
classes. Accepting classes by default and rejecting a list of potentially dangerous
ones is known as blacklisting; rejecting classes by default and accepting a list of
those that are presumed safe is known as whitelisting. Prefer whitelisting to
blacklisting, as blacklisting only protects you against known threats. A tool called
Serial Whitelist Application Trainer (SWAT) can be used to automatically prepare
a whitelist for your application [Schneider16]. The filtering facility will also
protect you against excessive memory usage, and excessively deep object graphs,
but it will not protect you against serialization bombs like the one shown above.
Unfortunately, serialization is still pervasive in the Java ecosystem. If you are
maintaining a system that is based on Java serialization, seriously consider migrat-
ing to a cross-platform structured-data representation, even though this may be a
time-consuming endeavor. Realistically, you may still find yourself having to
write or maintain a serializable class. It requires great care to write a serializable
class that is correct, safe, and efficient. The remainder of this chapter provides
advice on when and how to do this.
In summary, serialization is dangerous and should be avoided. If you are
designing a system from scratch, use a cross-platform structured-data representa-
tion such as JSON or protobuf instead. Do not deserialize untrusted data. If you
must do so, use object deserialization filtering, but be aware that it is not guaran-
teed to thwart all attacks. Avoid writing serializable classes. If you must do so,
exercise great caution.