CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
202
are several reasons that Comparator deserves its own interface. First, its name
provides excellent documentation every time it is used in an API, and it’s used a
lot. Second, the Comparator interface has strong requirements on what constitutes
a valid instance, which comprise its general contract. By implementing the
interface, you are pledging to adhere to its contract. Third, the interface is heavily
outfitted with useful default methods to transform and combine comparators.
You should seriously consider writing a purpose-built functional interface in
preference to using a standard one if you need a functional interface that shares
one or more of the following characteristics with Comparator:
• It will be commonly used and could benefit from a descriptive name.
• It has a strong contract associated with it.
• It would benefit from custom default methods.
If you elect to write your own functional interface, remember that it’s an interface
and hence should be designed with great care (Item 21).
Notice that the EldestEntryRemovalFunction interface (page 199) is labeled
with the @FunctionalInterface annotation. This annotation type is similar in
spirit to @Override. It is a statement of programmer intent that serves three
purposes: it tells readers of the class and its documentation that the interface was
designed to enable lambdas; it keeps you honest because the interface won’t com-
pile unless it has exactly one abstract method; and it prevents maintainers from
accidentally adding abstract methods to the interface as it evolves. Always anno-
tate your functional interfaces with the @FunctionalInterface annotation.
A final point should be made concerning the use of functional interfaces in
APIs. Do not provide a method with multiple overloadings that take different
functional interfaces in the same argument position if it could create a possible
ambiguity in the client. This is not just a theoretical problem. The submit method
of ExecutorService can take either a Callable<T> or a Runnable, and it is
possible to write a client program that requires a cast to indicate the correct
overloading (Item 52). The easiest way to avoid this problem is not to write
overloadings that take different functional interfaces in the same argument
position. This is a special case of the advice in Item 52, “use overloading
judiciously.”
In summary, now that Java has lambdas, it is imperative that you design your
APIs with lambdas in mind. Accept functional interface types on input and return
them on output. It is generally best to use the standard interfaces provided in
java.util.function.Function, but keep your eyes open for the relatively rare
cases where you would be better off writing your own functional interface.