ITEM 1: CONSIDER STATIC FACTORY METHODS INSTEAD OF CONSTRUCTORS
7
Prior to Java 8, interfaces couldn’t have static methods. By convention, static
factory methods for an interface named Type were put in a noninstantiable com-
panion class (Item 4) named Types. For example, the Java Collections Framework
has forty-five utility implementations of its interfaces, providing unmodifiable
collections, synchronized collections, and the like. Nearly all of these implemen-
tations are exported via static factory methods in one noninstantiable class
(java.util.Collections). The classes of the returned objects are all nonpublic.
The Collections Framework API is much smaller than it would have been had
it exported forty-five separate public classes, one for each convenience implemen-
tation. It is not just the bulk of the API that is reduced but the conceptual weight:
the number and difficulty of the concepts that programmers must master in order
to use the API. The programmer knows that the returned object has precisely the
API specified by its interface, so there is no need to read additional class docu-
mentation for the implementation class. Furthermore, using such a static factory
method requires the client to refer to the returned object by interface rather than
implementation class, which is generally good practice (Item 64).
As of Java 8, the restriction that interfaces cannot contain static methods was
eliminated, so there is typically little reason to provide a noninstantiable compan-
ion class for an interface. Many public static members that would have been at
home in such a class should instead be put in the interface itself. Note, however,
that it may still be necessary to put the bulk of the implementation code behind
these static methods in a separate package-private class. This is because Java 8
requires all static members of an interface to be public. Java 9 allows private static
methods, but static fields and static member classes are still required to be public.
A fourth advantage of static factories is that the class of the returned
object can vary from call to call as a function of the input parameters. Any sub-
type of the declared return type is permissible. The class of the returned object can
also vary from release to release.
The EnumSet class (Item 36) has no public constructors, only static factories.
In the OpenJDK implementation, they return an instance of one of two subclasses,
depending on the size of the underlying enum type: if it has sixty-four or fewer
elements, as most enum types do, the static factories return a RegularEnumSet
instance, which is backed by a single long; if the enum type has sixty-five or more
elements, the factories return a JumboEnumSet instance, backed by a long array. 
The existence of these two implementation classes is invisible to clients. If
RegularEnumSet ceased to offer performance advantages for small enum types, it
could be eliminated from a future release with no ill effects. Similarly, a future
release could add a third or fourth implementation of EnumSet if it proved beneficial