CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
104
Item 21: Design interfaces for posterity
Prior to Java 8, it was impossible to add methods to interfaces without breaking
existing implementations. If you added a new method to an interface, existing
implementations would, in general, lack the method, resulting in a compile-time
error. In Java 8, the default method construct was added [JLS 9.4], with the intent
of allowing the addition of methods to existing interfaces. But adding new meth-
ods to existing interfaces is fraught with risk.
The declaration for a default method includes a default implementation that is
used by all classes that implement the interface but do not implement the default
method. While the addition of default methods to Java makes it possible to add
methods to an existing interface, there is no guarantee that these methods will
work in all preexisting implementations. Default methods are “injected” into
existing implementations without the knowledge or consent of their implemen-
tors. Before Java 8, these implementations were written with the tacit understand-
ing that their interfaces would never acquire any new methods. 
Many new default methods were added to the core collection interfaces in
Java 8, primarily to facilitate the use of lambdas (Chapter 6). The Java libraries’
default methods are high-quality general-purpose implementations, and in most
cases, they work fine. But it is not always possible to write a default method
that maintains all invariants of every conceivable implementation.
For example, consider the removeIf method, which was added to the
Collection interface in Java 8. This method removes all elements for which a
given boolean function (or predicate) returns true. The default implementation is
specified to traverse the collection using its iterator, invoking the predicate on each
element, and using the iterator’s remove method to remove the elements for which
the predicate returns true. Presumably the declaration looks something like this:
// Default method added to the Collection interface in Java 8
default boolean removeIf(Predicate<? super E> filter) {
    Objects.requireNonNull(filter);
    boolean result = false;
    for (Iterator<E> it = iterator(); it.hasNext(); ) {
        if (filter.test(it.next())) {
            it.remove();
            result = true;
        }
    }
    return result;
}