CHAPTER 2
CREATING AND DESTROYING OBJECTS
18
The main advantage of the public field approach is that the API makes it clear
that the class is a singleton: the public static field is final, so it will always contain
the same object reference. The second advantage is that it’s simpler.
One advantage of the static factory approach is that it gives you the flexibility
to change your mind about whether the class is a singleton without changing its
API. The factory method returns the sole instance, but it could be modified to
return, say, a separate instance for each thread that invokes it. A second advantage
is that you can write a generic singleton factory if your application requires it
(Item 30). A final advantage of using a static factory is that a method reference can
be used as a supplier, for example Elvis::instance is a Supplier<Elvis>.
Unless one of these advantages is relevant, the public field approach is preferable.
To make a singleton class that uses either of these approaches serializable
(Chapter 12), it is not sufficient merely to add implements Serializable to its
declaration. To maintain the singleton guarantee, declare all instance fields
transient and provide a readResolve method (Item 89). Otherwise, each time a
serialized instance is deserialized, a new instance will be created, leading, in the
case of our example, to spurious Elvis sightings. To prevent this from happening,
add this readResolve method to the Elvis class:
// readResolve method to preserve singleton property
private Object readResolve() {
// Return the one true Elvis and let the garbage collector
// take care of the Elvis impersonator.
return INSTANCE;
}
A third way to implement a singleton is to declare a single-element enum:
// Enum singleton - the preferred approach
public enum Elvis {
INSTANCE;
public void leaveTheBuilding() { ... }
}
This approach is similar to the public field approach, but it is more concise,
provides the serialization machinery for free, and provides an ironclad guarantee
against multiple instantiation, even in the face of sophisticated serialization or
reflection attacks. This approach may feel a bit unnatural, but a single-element
enum type is often the best way to implement a singleton. Note that you can’t
use this approach if your singleton must extend a superclass other than Enum
(though you can declare an enum to implement interfaces).