CHAPTER 6
ENUMS AND ANNOTATIONS
158
doesn’t provide namespaces for int enum groups. Prefixes prevent name clashes
when two int enum groups have identically named constants, for example
between ELEMENT_MERCURY and PLANET_MERCURY.
Programs that use int enums are brittle. Because int enums are constant
variables [JLS, 4.12.4], their int values are compiled into the clients that use them
[JLS, 13.1]. If the value associated with an int enum is changed, its clients must be
recompiled. If not, the clients will still run, but their behavior will be incorrect.
There is no easy way to translate int enum constants into printable strings. If
you print such a constant or display it from a debugger, all you see is a number,
which isn’t very helpful. There is no reliable way to iterate over all the int enum
constants in a group, or even to obtain the size of an int enum group.
You may encounter a variant of this pattern in which String constants are
used in place of int constants. This variant, known as the String enum pattern, is
even less desirable. While it does provide printable strings for its constants, it can
lead naive users to hard-code string constants into client code instead of using
field names. If such a hard-coded string constant contains a typographical error, it
will escape detection at compile time and result in bugs at runtime. Also, it might
lead to performance problems, because it relies on string comparisons.
Luckily, Java provides an alternative that avoids all the shortcomings of the
int and string enum patterns and provides many added benefits. It is the enum
type [JLS, 8.9]. Here’s how it looks in its simplest form:
public enum Apple
{ FUJI, PIPPIN, GRANNY_SMITH }
public enum Orange { NAVEL, TEMPLE, BLOOD }
On the surface, these enum types may appear similar to those of other languages,
such as C, C++, and C#, but appearances are deceiving. Java’s enum types are
full-fledged classes, far more powerful than their counterparts in these other lan-
guages, where enums are essentially int values.
The basic idea behind Java’s enum types is simple: they are classes that export
one instance for each enumeration constant via a public static final field. Enum
types are effectively final, by virtue of having no accessible constructors. Because
clients can neither create instances of an enum type nor extend it, there can be no
instances but the declared enum constants. In other words, enum types are
instance-controlled (page 6). They are a generalization of singletons (Item 3),
which are essentially single-element enums.
Enums provide compile-time type safety. If you declare a parameter to be of
type Apple, you are guaranteed that any non-null object reference passed to the
parameter is one of the three valid Apple values. Attempts to pass values of the