PREFACE
xiv
Preface to the Second Edition
A lot has happened to the Java platform since I wrote the first edition of this book in
2001, and it’s high time for a second edition. The most significant set of changes
was the addition of generics, enum types, annotations, autoboxing, and the for-each
loop in Java 5. A close second was the addition of the new concurrency library,
java.util.concurrent, also released in Java 5. With Gilad Bracha, I had the good
fortune to lead the teams that designed the new language features. I also had the
good fortune to serve on the team that designed and developed the concurrency
library, which was led by Doug Lea.
The other big change in the platform is the widespread adoption of modern
Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), such as Eclipse, IntelliJ IDEA, and
NetBeans, and of static analysis tools, such as FindBugs. While I have not been
involved in these efforts, I’ve benefited from them immensely and learned how
they affect the Java development experience. 
In 2004, I moved from Sun to Google, but I’ve continued my involvement in
the development of the Java platform over the past four years, contributing to the
concurrency and collections APIs through the good offices of Google and the Java
Community Process. I’ve also had the pleasure of using the Java platform to
develop libraries for use within Google. Now I know what it feels like to be a user.
As was the case in 2001 when I wrote the first edition, my primary goal is to
share my experience with you so that you can imitate my successes while avoiding
my failures. The new material continues to make liberal use of real-world exam-
ples from the Java platform libraries.
The first edition succeeded beyond my wildest expectations, and I’ve done my
best to stay true to its spirit while covering all of the new material that was
required to bring the book up to date. It was inevitable that the book would grow,
and grow it did, from fifty-seven items to seventy-eight. Not only did I add
twenty-three items, but I thoroughly revised all the original material and retired a
few items whose better days had passed. In the Appendix, you can see how the
material in this edition relates to the material in the first edition.
In the Preface to the First Edition, I wrote that the Java programming language
and its libraries were immensely conducive to quality and productivity, and a joy
to work with. The changes in releases 5 and 6 have taken a good thing and made it
better. The platform is much bigger now than it was in 2001 and more complex,
but once you learn the patterns and idioms for using the new features, they make
your programs better and your life easier. I hope this edition captures my contin-