ITEM 83: USE LAZY INITIALIZATION JUDICIOUSLY
335
This code may appear a bit convoluted. In particular, the need for the local
variable (result) may be unclear. What this variable does is to ensure that field
is read only once in the common case where it’s already initialized. While not
strictly necessary, this may improve performance and is more elegant by the stan-
dards applied to low-level concurrent programming. On my machine, the method
above is about 1.4 times as fast as the obvious version without a local variable.
While you can apply the double-check idiom to static fields as well, there is
no reason to do so: the lazy initialization holder class idiom is a better choice.
Two variants of the double-check idiom bear noting. Occasionally, you may
need to lazily initialize an instance field that can tolerate repeated initialization. If
you find yourself in this situation, you can use a variant of the double-check idiom
that dispenses with the second check. It is, not surprisingly, known as the single-
check idiom. Here is how it looks. Note that field is still declared volatile:
// Single-check idiom - can cause repeated initialization!
private volatile FieldType field;
private FieldType getField() {
FieldType result = field;
if (result == null) 
field = result = computeFieldValue();
return result;
}
All of the initialization techniques discussed in this item apply to primitive
fields as well as object reference fields. When the double-check or single-check
idiom is applied to a numerical primitive field, the field’s value is checked against
0 (the default value for numerical primitive variables) rather than null. 
If you don’t care whether every thread recalculates the value of a field, and the
type of the field is a primitive other than long or double, then you may choose to
remove the volatile modifier from the field declaration in the single-check
idiom. This variant is known as the racy single-check idiom. It speeds up field
access on some architectures, at the expense of additional initializations (up to one
per thread that accesses the field). This is definitely an exotic technique, not for
everyday use.
In summary, you should initialize most fields normally, not lazily. If you must
initialize a field lazily in order to achieve your performance goals or to break a
harmful initialization circularity, then use the appropriate lazy initialization
technique. For instance fields, it is the double-check idiom; for static fields, the
lazy initialization holder class idiom. For instance fields that can tolerate repeated
initialization, you may also consider the single-check idiom.