ITEM 61: PREFER PRIMITIVE TYPES TO BOXED PRIMITIVES
275
Finally, consider the program from page 24 in Item 6:
// Hideously slow program! Can you spot the object creation?
public static void main(String[] args) {
Long sum = 0L;
for (long i = 0; i < Integer.MAX_VALUE; i++) {
sum += i;
}
System.out.println(sum);
}
This program is much slower than it should be because it accidentally declares a
local variable (sum) to be of the boxed primitive type Long instead of the primitive
type long. The program compiles without error or warning, and the variable is
repeatedly boxed and unboxed, causing the observed performance degradation.
In all three of the programs discussed in this item, the problem was the same:
the programmer ignored the distinction between primitives and boxed primitives
and suffered the consequences. In the first two programs, the consequences were
outright failure; in the third, severe performance problems.
So when should you use boxed primitives? They have several legitimate uses.
The first is as elements, keys, and values in collections. You can’t put primitives in
collections, so you’re forced to use boxed primitives. This is a special case of a
more general one. You must use boxed primitives as type parameters in
parameterized types and methods (Chapter 5), because the language does not
permit you to use primitives. For example, you cannot declare a variable to be of
type ThreadLocal<int>, so you must use ThreadLocal<Integer> instead.
Finally, you must use boxed primitives when making reflective method invocations
(Item 65).
In summary, use primitives in preference to boxed primitives whenever you
have the choice. Primitive types are simpler and faster. If you must use boxed
primitives, be careful! Autoboxing reduces the verbosity, but not the danger, of
using boxed primitives. When your program compares two boxed primitives
with the == operator, it does an identity comparison, which is almost certainly not
what you want. When your program does mixed-type computations involving
boxed and unboxed primitives, it does unboxing, and when your program does
unboxing, it can throw a NullPointerException. Finally, when your program
boxes primitive values, it can result in costly and unnecessary object creations.