CHAPTER 11
CONCURRENCY
322
imposed by the need to ensure that every core has a consistent view of memory.
Another hidden cost of oversynchronization is that it can limit the VM’s ability to
optimize code execution.
If you are writing a mutable class, you have two options: you can omit all
synchronization and allow the client to synchronize externally if concurrent use is
desired, or you can synchronize internally, making the class thread-safe (Item 82).
You should choose the latter option only if you can achieve significantly higher
concurrency with internal synchronization than you could by having the client
lock the entire object externally. The collections in java.util (with the exception
of the obsolete Vector and Hashtable) take the former approach, while those in
java.util.concurrent take the latter (Item 81).
In the early days of Java, many classes violated these guidelines. For example,
StringBuffer instances are almost always used by a single thread, yet they per-
form internal synchronization. It is for this reason that StringBuffer was sup-
planted by StringBuilder, which is just an unsynchronized StringBuffer.
Similarly, it’s a large part of the reason that the thread-safe pseudorandom number
generator in java.util.Random was supplanted by the unsynchronized imple-
mentation in java.util.concurrent.ThreadLocalRandom. When in doubt, do
not synchronize your class, but document that it is not thread-safe.
If you do synchronize your class internally, you can use various techniques to
achieve high concurrency, such as lock splitting, lock striping, and nonblocking
concurrency control. These techniques are beyond the scope of this book, but they
are discussed elsewhere [Goetz06, Herlihy08].
If a method modifies a static field and there is any possibility that the method
will be called from multiple threads, you must synchronize access to the field
internally (unless the class can tolerate nondeterministic behavior). It is not
possible for a multithreaded client to perform external synchronization on such a
method, because unrelated clients can invoke the method without synchronization.
The field is essentially a global variable even if it is private because it can be read
and modified by unrelated clients. The nextSerialNumber field used by the
method generateSerialNumber in Item 78 exemplifies this situation.
In summary, to avoid deadlock and data corruption, never call an alien method
from within a synchronized region. More generally, keep the amount of work that
you do from within synchronized regions to a minimum. When you are designing
a mutable class, think about whether it should do its own synchronization. In the
multicore era, it is more important than ever not to oversynchronize. Synchronize
your class internally only if there is a good reason to do so, and document your
decision clearly (Item 82).