CHAPTER 12
SERIALIZATION
346
Item 87: Consider using a custom serialized form
When you are writing a class under time pressure, it is generally appropriate to
concentrate your efforts on designing the best API. Sometimes this means releas-
ing a “throwaway” implementation that you know you’ll replace in a future
release. Normally this is not a problem, but if the class implements Serializable
and uses the default serialized form, you’ll never be able to escape completely
from the throwaway implementation. It will dictate the serialized form forever.
This is not just a theoretical problem. It happened to several classes in the Java
libraries, including BigInteger.
Do not accept the default serialized form without first considering
whether it is appropriate. Accepting the default serialized form should be a con-
scious decision that this encoding is reasonable from the standpoint of flexibility,
performance, and correctness. Generally speaking, you should accept the default
serialized form only if it is largely identical to the encoding that you would choose
if you were designing a custom serialized form.
The default serialized form of an object is a reasonably efficient encoding of
the physical representation of the object graph rooted at the object. In other words,
it describes the data contained in the object and in every object that is reachable
from this object. It also describes the topology by which all of these objects are
interlinked. The ideal serialized form of an object contains only the logical data
represented by the object. It is independent of the physical representation.
The default serialized form is likely to be appropriate if an object’s phys-
ical representation is identical to its logical content. For example, the default
serialized form would be reasonable for the following class, which simplistically
represents a person’s name:
// Good candidate for default serialized form
public class Name implements Serializable {
/**
* Last name. Must be non-null.
* @serial
*/
private final String lastName;
/**
* First name. Must be non-null.
* @serial
*/
private final String firstName;