CHAPTER 11
CONCURRENCY
320
Incidentally, note that this program catches two different exception types in one
catch clause. This facility, informally known as multi-catch, was added in Java 7.
It can greatly increase the clarity and reduce the size of programs that behave the
same way in response to multiple exception types.
When we run this program, we don’t get an exception; we get a deadlock. The
background thread calls s.removeObserver, which attempts to lock observers,
but it can’t acquire the lock, because the main thread already has the lock. All the
while, the main thread is waiting for the background thread to finish removing the
observer, which explains the deadlock.
This example is contrived because there is no reason for the observer to use a
background thread to unsubscribe itself, but the problem is real. Invoking alien
methods from within synchronized regions has caused many deadlocks in real
systems, such as GUI toolkits.
In both of the previous examples (the exception and the deadlock) we were
lucky. The resource that was guarded by the synchronized region (observers)
was in a consistent state when the alien method (added) was invoked. Suppose
you were to invoke an alien method from a synchronized region while the invari-
ant protected by the synchronized region was temporarily invalid. Because locks
in the Java programming language are reentrant, such calls won’t deadlock. As in
the first example, which resulted in an exception, the calling thread already holds
the lock, so the thread will succeed when it tries to reacquire the lock, even though
another conceptually unrelated operation is in progress on the data guarded by the
lock. The consequences of such a failure can be catastrophic. In essence, the lock
has failed to do its job. Reentrant locks simplify the construction of multithreaded
object-oriented programs, but they can turn liveness failures into safety failures.
Luckily, it is usually not too hard to fix this sort of problem by moving alien
method invocations out of synchronized blocks. For the notifyElementAdded
method, this involves taking a “snapshot” of the observers list that can then be
safely traversed without a lock. With this change, both of the previous examples
run without exception or deadlock: 
// Alien method moved outside of synchronized block - open calls
private void notifyElementAdded(E element) {
List<SetObserver<E>> snapshot = null;
synchronized(observers) {
snapshot = new ArrayList<>(observers);
}
for (SetObserver<E> observer : snapshot)
observer.added(this, element);
}