CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
74
developed. Finally, information hiding decreases the risk in building large systems
because individual components may prove successful even if the system does not.
Java has many facilities to aid in information hiding. The access control mecha-
nism [JLS, 6.6] specifies the accessibility of classes, interfaces, and members. The
accessibility of an entity is determined by the location of its declaration and by
which, if any, of the access modifiers (private, protected, and public) is present
on the declaration. Proper use of these modifiers is essential to information hiding.
The rule of thumb is simple: make each class or member as inaccessible as
possible. In other words, use the lowest possible access level consistent with the
proper functioning of the software that you are writing. 
For top-level (non-nested) classes and interfaces, there are only two possible
access levels: package-private and public. If you declare a top-level class or
interface with the public modifier, it will be public; otherwise, it will be package-
private. If a top-level class or interface can be made package-private, it should be.
By making it package-private, you make it part of the implementation rather than
the exported API, and you can modify it, replace it, or eliminate it in a subsequent
release without fear of harming existing clients. If you make it public, you are
obligated to support it forever to maintain compatibility.
If a package-private top-level class or interface is used by only one class,
consider making the top-level class a private static nested class of the sole class
that uses it (Item 24). This reduces its accessibility from all the classes in its
package to the one class that uses it. But it is far more important to reduce the
accessibility of a gratuitously public class than of a package-private top-level
class: the public class is part of the package’s API, while the package-private top-
level class is already part of its implementation.
For members (fields, methods, nested classes, and nested interfaces), there are
four possible access levels, listed here in order of increasing accessibility:
• private—The member is accessible only from the top-level class where it is
declared.
• package-private—The member is accessible from any class in the package
where it is declared. Technically known as default access, this is the access
level you get if no access modifier is specified (except for interface members,
which are public by default).
• protected—The member is accessible from subclasses of the class where it is
declared (subject to a few restrictions [JLS, 6.6.2]) and from any class in the
package where it is declared.
• public—The member is accessible from anywhere.