ITEM 61: PREFER PRIMITIVE TYPES TO BOXED PRIMITIVES
273
Item 61: Prefer primitive types to boxed primitives
Java has a two-part type system, consisting of primitives, such as int, double, and
boolean, and reference types, such as String and List. Every primitive type has
a corresponding reference type, called a boxed primitive. The boxed primitives
corresponding to int, double, and boolean are Integer, Double, and Boolean.
As mentioned in Item 6, autoboxing and auto-unboxing blur but do not erase
the distinction between the primitive and boxed primitive types. There are real dif-
ferences between the two, and it’s important that you remain aware of which you
are using and that you choose carefully between them.
There are three major differences between primitives and boxed primitives.
First, primitives have only their values, whereas boxed primitives have identities
distinct from their values. In other words, two boxed primitive instances can have
the same value and different identities. Second, primitive types have only fully
functional values, whereas each boxed primitive type has one nonfunctional value,
which is null, in addition to all the functional values of the corresponding primi-
tive type. Last, primitives are more time- and space-efficient than boxed primitives.
All three of these differences can get you into real trouble if you aren’t careful.
Consider the following comparator, which is designed to represent ascending
numerical order on Integer values. (Recall that a comparator’s compare method
returns a number that is negative, zero, or positive, depending on whether its first
argument is less than, equal to, or greater than its second.) You wouldn’t need to
write this comparator in practice because it implements the natural ordering on
Integer, but it makes for an interesting example:
// Broken comparator - can you spot the flaw?
Comparator<Integer> naturalOrder = 
(i, j) -> (i < j) ? -1 : (i == j ? 0 : 1);
This comparator looks like it ought to work, and it will pass many tests. For
example, it can be used with Collections.sort to correctly sort a million-element
list, whether or not the list contains duplicate elements. But the comparator is
deeply flawed. To convince yourself of this, merely print the value of
naturalOrder.compare(new Integer(42), new Integer(42)). Both Integer
instances represent the same value (42), so the value of this expression should be 0,
but it’s 1, which indicates that the first Integer value is greater than the second!
So what’s the problem? The first test in naturalOrder works fine. Evaluating
the expression i < j causes the Integer instances referred to by i and j to be
auto-unboxed; that is, it extracts their primitive values. The evaluation proceeds to