ITEM 45: USE STREAMS JUDICIOUSLY
207
When you start using streams, you may feel the urge to convert all your loops
into streams, but resist the urge. While it may be possible, it will likely harm the
readability and maintainability of your code base. As a rule, even moderately
complex tasks are best accomplished using some combination of streams and iter-
ation, as illustrated by the Anagrams programs above. So refactor existing code
to use streams and use them in new code only where it makes sense to do so.
As shown in the programs in this item, stream pipelines express repeated com-
putation using function objects (typically lambdas or method references), while
iterative code expresses repeated computation using code blocks. There are some
things you can do from code blocks that you can’t do from function objects:
• From a code block, you can read or modify any local variable in scope; from a
lambda, you can only read final or effectively final variables [JLS 4.12.4], and
you can’t modify any local variables.
• From a code block, you can return from the enclosing method, break or
continue an enclosing loop, or throw any checked exception that this method
is declared to throw; from a lambda you can do none of these things.
If a computation is best expressed using these techniques, then it’s probably not a
good match for streams. Conversely, streams make it very easy to do some things:
• Uniformly transform sequences of elements
• Filter sequences of elements
• Combine sequences of elements using a single operation (for example to add
them, concatenate them, or compute their minimum)
• Accumulate sequences of elements into a collection, perhaps grouping them by
some common attribute
• Search a sequence of elements for an element satisfying some criterion
If a computation is best expressed using these techniques, then it is a good candi-
date for streams.
One thing that is hard to do with streams is to access corresponding elements
from multiple stages of a pipeline simultaneously: once you map a value to some
other value, the original value is lost. One workaround is to map each value to a
pair object containing the original value and the new value, but this is not a
satisfying solution, especially if the pair objects are required for multiple stages of
a pipeline. The resulting code is messy and verbose, which defeats a primary
purpose of streams. When it is applicable, a better workaround is to invert the
mapping when you need access to the earlier-stage value.