ITEM 8: AVOID FINALIZERS AND CLEANERS
31
thrown from a constructor or its serialization equivalents—the readObject and
readResolve methods (Chapter 12)—the finalizer of a malicious subclass can run
on the partially constructed object that should have “died on the vine.” This final-
izer can record a reference to the object in a static field, preventing it from being
garbage collected. Once the malformed object has been recorded, it is a simple
matter to invoke arbitrary methods on this object that should never have been
allowed to exist in the first place. Throwing an exception from a constructor
should be sufficient to prevent an object from coming into existence; in the
presence of finalizers, it is not. Such attacks can have dire consequences. Final
classes are immune to finalizer attacks because no one can write a malicious
subclass of a final class. To protect nonfinal classes from finalizer attacks,
write a final finalize method that does nothing.
So what should you do instead of writing a finalizer or cleaner for a class
whose objects encapsulate resources that require termination, such as files or
threads? Just have your class implement AutoCloseable, and require its clients
to invoke the close method on each instance when it is no longer needed,
typically using try-with-resources to ensure termination even in the face of
exceptions (Item 9). One detail worth mentioning is that the instance must keep
track of whether it has been closed: the close method must record in a field that
the object is no longer valid, and other methods must check this field and throw an
IllegalStateException if they are called after the object has been closed.
So what, if anything, are cleaners and finalizers good for? They have perhaps
two legitimate uses. One is to act as a safety net in case the owner of a resource
neglects to call its close method. While there’s no guarantee that the cleaner or
finalizer will run promptly (or at all), it is better to free the resource late than never
if the client fails to do so. If you’re considering writing such a safety-net finalizer,
think long and hard about whether the protection is worth the cost. Some Java
library classes, such as FileInputStream, FileOutputStream, ThreadPoolEx-
ecutor, and java.sql.Connection, have finalizers that serve as safety nets.
A second legitimate use of cleaners concerns objects with native peers. A
native peer is a native (non-Java) object to which a normal object delegates via
native methods. Because a native peer is not a normal object, the garbage collector
doesn’t know about it and can’t reclaim it when its Java peer is reclaimed. A
cleaner or finalizer may be an appropriate vehicle for this task, assuming the
performance is acceptable and the native peer holds no critical resources. If the
performance is unacceptable or the native peer holds resources that must be
reclaimed promptly, the class should have a close method, as described earlier.