CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
114
exported class. In this case, the member class is an exported API element and can-
not be changed from a nonstatic to a static member class in a subsequent release
without violating backward compatibility.
As you would expect, an anonymous class has no name. It is not a member of
its enclosing class. Rather than being declared along with other members, it is
simultaneously declared and instantiated at the point of use. Anonymous classes
are permitted at any point in the code where an expression is legal. Anonymous
classes have enclosing instances if and only if they occur in a nonstatic context.
But even if they occur in a static context, they cannot have any static members
other than constant variables, which are final primitive or string fields initialized
to constant expressions [JLS, 4.12.4].
There are many limitations on the applicability of anonymous classes. You
can’t instantiate them except at the point they’re declared. You can’t perform
instanceof tests or do anything else that requires you to name the class. You
can’t declare an anonymous class to implement multiple interfaces or to extend a
class and implement an interface at the same time. Clients of an anonymous class
can’t invoke any members except those it inherits from its supertype. Because
anonymous classes occur in the midst of expressions, they must be kept short—
about ten lines or fewer—or readability will suffer.
Before lambdas were added to Java (Chapter 6), anonymous classes were the
preferred means of creating small function objects and process objects on the fly,
but lambdas are now preferred (Item 42). Another common use of anonymous
classes is in the implementation of static factory methods (see intArrayAsList in
Item 20). 
Local classes are the least frequently used of the four kinds of nested classes. A
local class can be declared practically anywhere a local variable can be declared and
obeys the same scoping rules. Local classes have attributes in common with each of
the other kinds of nested classes. Like member classes, they have names and can be
used repeatedly. Like anonymous classes, they have enclosing instances only if they
are defined in a nonstatic context, and they cannot contain static members. And like
anonymous classes, they should be kept short so as not to harm readability.
To recap, there are four different kinds of nested classes, and each has its
place. If a nested class needs to be visible outside of a single method or is too long
to fit comfortably inside a method, use a member class. If each instance of a mem-
ber class needs a reference to its enclosing instance, make it nonstatic; otherwise,
make it static. Assuming the class belongs inside a method, if you need to create
instances from only one location and there is a preexisting type that characterizes
the class, make it an anonymous class; otherwise, make it a local class.