CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
282
Item 65: Prefer interfaces to reflection
The core reflection facility, java.lang.reflect, offers programmatic access to
arbitrary classes. Given a Class object, you can obtain Constructor, Method, and
Field instances representing the constructors, methods, and fields of the class
represented by the Class instance. These objects provide programmatic access to
the class’s member names, field types, method signatures, and so on.
Moreover, Constructor, Method, and Field instances let you manipulate
their underlying counterparts reflectively: you can construct instances, invoke
methods, and access fields of the underlying class by invoking methods on the
Constructor, Method, and Field instances. For example, Method.invoke lets
you invoke any method on any object of any class (subject to the usual security
constraints). Reflection allows one class to use another, even if the latter class did
not exist when the former was compiled. This power, however, comes at a price:
• You lose all the benefits of compile-time type checking, including exception
checking. If a program attempts to invoke a nonexistent or inaccessible method
reflectively, it will fail at runtime unless you’ve taken special precautions.
• The code required to perform reflective access is clumsy and verbose. It is
tedious to write and difficult to read.
• Performance suffers. Reflective method invocation is much slower than
normal method invocation. Exactly how much slower is hard to say, as there
are many factors at work. On my machine, invoking a method with no input
parameters and an int return was eleven times slower when done reflectively.
There are a few sophisticated applications that require reflection. Examples
include code analysis tools and dependency injection frameworks. Even such tools
have been moving away from reflection of late, as its disadvantages become
clearer. If you have any doubts as to whether your application requires reflection,
it probably doesn’t.
You can obtain many of the benefits of reflection while incurring few of
its costs by using it only in a very limited form. For many programs that must
use a class that is unavailable at compile time, there exists at compile time an
appropriate interface or superclass by which to refer to the class (Item 64). If this
is the case, you can create instances reflectively and access them normally via
their interface or superclass. 
For example, here is a program that creates a Set<String> instance whose
class is specified by the first command line argument. The program inserts the