ITEM 76: STRIVE FOR FAILURE ATOMICITY
309
typed element will naturally fail with a ClassCastException as a result of
searching for the element in the tree, before the tree has been modified in any way.
A third approach to achieving failure atomicity is to perform the operation on
a temporary copy of the object and to replace the contents of the object with the
temporary copy once the operation is complete. This approach occurs naturally
when the computation can be performed more quickly once the data has been
stored in a temporary data structure. For example, some sorting functions copy
their input list into an array prior to sorting to reduce the cost of accessing
elements in the inner loop of the sort. This is done for performance, but as an
added benefit, it ensures that the input list will be untouched if the sort fails.
A last and far less common approach to achieving failure atomicity is to write
recovery code that intercepts a failure that occurs in the midst of an operation, and
causes the object to roll back its state to the point before the operation began. This
approach is used mainly for durable (disk-based) data structures.
While failure atomicity is generally desirable, it is not always achievable. For
example, if two threads attempt to modify the same object concurrently without
proper synchronization, the object may be left in an inconsistent state. It would
therefore be wrong to assume that an object was still usable after catching a
ConcurrentModificationException. Errors are unrecoverable, so you need not
even attempt to preserve failure atomicity when throwing AssertionError.
Even where failure atomicity is possible, it is not always desirable. For some
operations, it would significantly increase the cost or complexity. That said, it is
often both free and easy to achieve failure atomicity once you’re aware of the
issue.
In summary, as a rule, any generated exception that is part of a method’s
specification should leave the object in the same state it was in prior to the method
invocation. Where this rule is violated, the API documentation should clearly
indicate what state the object will be left in. Unfortunately, plenty of existing API
documentation fails to live up to this ideal.