CHAPTER 5
GENERICS
118
Before generics were added to Java, this would have been an exemplary col-
lection declaration. As of Java 9, it is still legal, but far from exemplary:
// Raw collection type - don't do this!
// My stamp collection. Contains only Stamp instances.
private final Collection stamps = ... ;
If you use this declaration today and then accidentally put a coin into your stamp
collection, the erroneous insertion compiles and runs without error (though the
compiler does emit a vague warning):
// Erroneous insertion of coin into stamp collection
stamps.add(new Coin( ... )); // Emits "unchecked call" warning
You don’t get an error until you try to retrieve the coin from the stamp collection:
// Raw iterator type - don't do this!
for (Iterator i = stamps.iterator(); i.hasNext(); )
Stamp stamp = (Stamp) i.next(); // Throws ClassCastException
stamp.cancel();
As mentioned throughout this book, it pays to discover errors as soon as pos-
sible after they are made, ideally at compile time. In this case, you don’t discover
the error until runtime, long after it has happened, and in code that may be distant
from the code containing the error. Once you see the ClassCastException, you
have to search through the codebase looking for the method invocation that put the
coin into the stamp collection. The compiler can’t help you, because it can’t
understand the comment that says, “Contains only Stamp instances.”
With generics, the type declaration contains the information, not the comment:
// Parameterized collection type - typesafe
private final Collection<Stamp> stamps = ... ;
From this declaration, the compiler knows that stamps should contain only Stamp
instances and guarantees it to be true, assuming your entire codebase compiles
without emitting (or suppressing; see Item 27) any warnings. When stamps is
declared with a parameterized type declaration, the erroneous insertion generates
a compile-time error message that tells you exactly what is wrong:
Test.java:9: error: incompatible types: Coin cannot be converted 
to Stamp
c.add(new Coin());
^