ITEM 81: PREFER CONCURRENCY UTILITIES TO WAIT AND NOTIFY
329
• Another thread could have obtained the lock and changed the guarded state
between the time a thread invoked notify and the waiting thread woke up.
• Another thread could have invoked notify accidentally or maliciously when
the condition did not hold. Classes expose themselves to this sort of mischief
by waiting on publicly accessible objects. Any wait in a synchronized method
of a publicly accessible object is susceptible to this problem.
• The notifying thread could be overly “generous” in waking waiting threads.
For example, the notifying thread might invoke notifyAll even if only some
of the waiting threads have their condition satisfied.
• The waiting thread could (rarely) wake up in the absence of a notify. This is
known as a spurious wakeup [POSIX, 11.4.3.6.1; Java9-api].
A related issue is whether to use notify or notifyAll to wake waiting
threads. (Recall that notify wakes a single waiting thread, assuming such a
thread exists, and notifyAll wakes all waiting threads.) It is sometimes said that
you should always use notifyAll. This is reasonable, conservative advice. It will
always yield correct results because it guarantees that you’ll wake the threads that
need to be awakened. You may wake some other threads, too, but this won’t affect
the correctness of your program. These threads will check the condition for which
they’re waiting and, finding it false, will continue waiting.
As an optimization, you may choose to invoke notify instead of notifyAll
if all threads that could be in the wait-set are waiting for the same condition and
only one thread at a time can benefit from the condition becoming true. 
Even if these preconditions are satisfied, there may be cause to use notifyAll
in place of notify. Just as placing the wait invocation in a loop protects against
accidental or malicious notifications on a publicly accessible object, using
notifyAll in place of notify protects against accidental or malicious waits by an
unrelated thread. Such waits could otherwise “swallow” a critical notification,
leaving its intended recipient waiting indefinitely.
In summary, using wait and notify directly is like programming in “concur-
rency assembly language,” as compared to the higher-level language provided by
java.util.concurrent. There is seldom, if ever, a reason to use wait and
notify in new code. If you maintain code that uses wait and notify, make sure
that it always invokes wait from within a while loop using the standard idiom.
The notifyAll method should generally be used in preference to notify. If
notify is used, great care must be taken to ensure liveness.