ITEM 27: ELIMINATE UNCHECKED WARNINGS
123
Item 27: Eliminate unchecked warnings
When you program with generics, you will see many compiler warnings:
unchecked cast warnings, unchecked method invocation warnings, unchecked
parameterized vararg type warnings, and unchecked conversion warnings. The
more experience you acquire with generics, the fewer warnings you’ll get, but
don’t expect newly written code to compile cleanly.
Many unchecked warnings are easy to eliminate. For example, suppose you
accidentally write this declaration:
Set<Lark> exaltation = new HashSet();
The compiler will gently remind you what you did wrong:
Venery.java:4: warning: [unchecked] unchecked conversion
        Set<Lark> exaltation = new HashSet();
                               ^
required: Set<Lark>
found:    HashSet
You can then make the indicated correction, causing the warning to disappear.
Note that you don’t actually have to specify the type parameter, merely to indicate
that it’s present with the diamond operator (<>), introduced in Java 7. The com-
piler will then infer the correct actual type parameter (in this case, Lark):
Set<Lark> exaltation = new HashSet<>();
Some warnings will be much more difficult to eliminate. This chapter is filled
with examples of such warnings. When you get warnings that require some
thought, persevere! Eliminate every unchecked warning that you can. If you
eliminate all warnings, you are assured that your code is typesafe, which is a very
good thing. It means that you won’t get a ClassCastException at runtime, and it
increases your confidence that your program will behave as you intended.
If you can’t eliminate a warning, but you can prove that the code that
provoked the warning is typesafe, then (and only then) suppress the warning
with an @SuppressWarnings("unchecked") annotation. If you suppress warn-
ings without first proving that the code is typesafe, you are giving yourself a false
sense of security. The code may compile without emitting any warnings, but it can
still throw a ClassCastException at runtime. If, however, you ignore unchecked
warnings that you know to be safe (instead of suppressing them), you won’t notice
when a new warning crops up that represents a real problem. The new warning
will get lost amidst all the false alarms that you didn’t silence.