CHAPTER 2
CREATING AND DESTROYING OBJECTS
8
for performance. Clients neither know nor care about the class of the object they get
back from the factory; they care only that it is some subclass of EnumSet.
A fifth advantage of static factories is that the class of the returned object
need not exist when the class containing the method is written. Such flexible
static factory methods form the basis of service provider frameworks, like the Java
Database Connectivity API (JDBC). A service provider framework is a system in
which providers implement a service, and the system makes the implementations
available to clients, decoupling the clients from the implementations.
There are three essential components in a service provider framework: a
service interface, which represents an implementation; a provider registration
API, which providers use to register implementations; and a service access API,
which clients use to obtain instances of the service. The service access API may
allow clients to specify criteria for choosing an implementation. In the absence of
such criteria, the API returns an instance of a default implementation, or allows
the client to cycle through all available implementations. The service access API
is the flexible static factory that forms the basis of the service provider framework.
An optional fourth component of a service provider framework is a service
provider interface, which describes a factory object that produce instances of the
service interface. In the absence of a service provider interface, implementations
must be instantiated reflectively (Item 65). In the case of JDBC, Connection
plays the part of the service interface, DriverManager.registerDriver is the
provider registration API, DriverManager.getConnection is the service access
API, and Driver is the service provider interface.
There are many variants of the service provider framework pattern. For exam-
ple, the service access API can return a richer service interface to clients than the
one furnished by providers. This is the Bridge pattern [Gamma95]. Dependency
injection frameworks (Item 5) can be viewed as powerful service providers. Since
Java 6, the platform includes a general-purpose service provider framework,
java.util.ServiceLoader, so you needn’t, and generally shouldn’t, write your
own (Item 59). JDBC doesn’t use ServiceLoader, as the former predates the latter.
The main limitation of providing only static factory methods is that
classes without public or protected constructors cannot be subclassed. For
example, it is impossible to subclass any of the convenience implementation
classes in the Collections Framework. Arguably this can be a blessing in disguise
because it encourages programmers to use composition instead of inheritance
(Item 18), and is required for immutable types (Item 17).
A second shortcoming of static factory methods is that they are hard for
programmers to find. They do not stand out in API documentation in the way