CHAPTER 8
METHODS
236
Item 51: Design method signatures carefully
This item is a grab bag of API design hints that don’t quite deserve items of their
own. Taken together, they’ll help make your API easier to learn and use and less
prone to errors.
Choose method names carefully. Names should always obey the standard
naming conventions (Item 68). Your primary goal should be to choose names that
are understandable and consistent with other names in the same package. Your
secondary goal should be to choose names consistent with the broader consensus,
where it exists. Avoid long method names. When in doubt, look to the Java library
APIs for guidance. While there are plenty of inconsistencies—inevitable, given
the size and scope of these libraries—there is also a fair amount of consensus.
Don’t go overboard in providing convenience methods. Every method
should “pull its weight.” Too many methods make a class difficult to learn, use,
document, test, and maintain. This is doubly true for interfaces, where too many
methods complicate life for implementors as well as users. For each action
supported by your class or interface, provide a fully functional method. Consider
providing a “shorthand” only if it will be used often. When in doubt, leave it out.
Avoid long parameter lists. Aim for four parameters or fewer. Most
programmers can’t remember longer parameter lists. If many of your methods
exceed this limit, your API won’t be usable without constant reference to its
documentation. Modern IDEs help, but you are still much better off with short
parameter lists. Long sequences of identically typed parameters are especially
harmful. Not only won’t users be able to remember the order of the parameters,
but when they transpose parameters accidentally, their programs will still compile
and run. They just won’t do what their authors intended.
There are three techniques for shortening overly long parameter lists. One is
to break the method up into multiple methods, each of which requires only a sub-
set of the parameters. If done carelessly, this can lead to too many methods, but it
can also help reduce the method count by increasing orthogonality. For example,
consider the java.util.List interface. It does not provide methods to find the
first or last index of an element in a sublist, both of which would require three
parameters. Instead it provides the subList method, which takes two parameters
and returns a view of a sublist. This method can be combined with the indexOf or
lastIndexOf method, each of which has a single parameter, to yield the desired
functionality. Moreover, the subList method can be combined with any method
that operates on a List instance to perform arbitrary computations on sublists.
The resulting API has a very high power-to-weight ratio.