CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
284
While this program is just a toy, the technique it demonstrates is quite
powerful. The toy program could easily be turned into a generic set tester that
validates the specified Set implementation by aggressively manipulating one or
more instances and checking that they obey the Set contract. Similarly, it could be
turned into a generic set performance analysis tool. In fact, this technique is
sufficiently powerful to implement a full-blown service provider framework
(Item 1). Usually, this technique is all that you need in the way of reflection.
This example demonstrates two disadvantages of reflection. First, the example
can generate six different exceptions at runtime, all of which would have been
compile-time errors if reflective instantiation were not used. (For fun, you can
cause the program to generate each of the six exceptions by passing in appropriate
command line arguments.) The second disadvantage is that it takes twenty-five
lines of tedious code to generate an instance of the class from its name, whereas a
constructor invocation would fit neatly on a single line. The length of the program
could be reduced by catching ReflectiveOperationException, a superclass of
the various reflective exceptions that was introduced in Java 7. Both disadvantages
are restricted to the part of the program that instantiates the object. Once instanti-
ated, the set is indistinguishable from any other Set instance. In a real program,
the great bulk of the code is thus unaffected by this limited use of reflection.
If you compile this program, you’ll get an unchecked cast warning. This
warning is legitimate, in that the cast to Class<? extends Set<String>> will
succeed even if the named class is not a Set implementation, in which case the
program with throw a ClassCastException when it instantiates the class. To
learn about suppressing the warning, read Item 27.
A legitimate, if rare, use of reflection is to manage a class’s dependencies on
other classes, methods, or fields that may be absent at runtime. This can be useful
if you are writing a package that must run against multiple versions of some other
package. The technique is to compile your package against the minimal environ-
ment required to support it, typically the oldest version, and to access any newer
classes or methods reflectively. To make this work, you have to take appropriate
action if a newer class or method that you are attempting to access does not exist
at runtime. Appropriate action might consist of using some alternate means to
accomplish the same goal or operating with reduced functionality.
In summary, reflection is a powerful facility that is required for certain
sophisticated system programming tasks, but it has many disadvantages. If you are
writing a program that has to work with classes unknown at compile time, you
should, if at all possible, use reflection only to instantiate objects, and access the
objects using some interface or superclass that is known at compile time.