CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
100
public interface Songwriter {
Song compose(int chartPosition);
}
In real life, some singers are also songwriters. Because we used interfaces
rather than abstract classes to define these types, it is perfectly permissible for a
single class to implement both Singer and Songwriter. In fact, we can define a
third interface that extends both Singer and Songwriter and adds new methods
that are appropriate to the combination:
public interface SingerSongwriter extends Singer, Songwriter {
AudioClip strum();
void actSensitive();
}
You don’t always need this level of flexibility, but when you do, interfaces are
a lifesaver. The alternative is a bloated class hierarchy containing a separate class
for every supported combination of attributes. If there are n attributes in the type
system, there are 2n possible combinations that you might have to support. This is
what’s known as a combinatorial explosion. Bloated class hierarchies can lead to
bloated classes with many methods that differ only in the type of their arguments
because there are no types in the class hierarchy to capture common behaviors.
Interfaces enable safe, powerful functionality enhancements via the wrap-
per class idiom (Item 18). If you use abstract classes to define types, you leave the
programmer who wants to add functionality with no alternative but inheritance.
The resulting classes are less powerful and more fragile than wrapper classes.
When there is an obvious implementation of an interface method in terms of
other interface methods, consider providing implementation assistance to pro-
grammers in the form of a default method. For an example of this technique, see
the removeIf method on page 104. If you provide default methods, be sure to doc-
ument them for inheritance using the @implSpec Javadoc tag (Item 19). 
There are limits on how much implementation assistance you can provide
with default methods. Although many interfaces specify the behavior of Object
methods such as equals and hashCode, you are not permitted to provide default
methods for them. Also, interfaces are not permitted to contain instance fields or
nonpublic static members (with the exception of private static methods). Finally,
you can’t add default methods to an interface that you don’t control.
You can, however, combine the advantages of interfaces and abstract classes
by providing an abstract skeletal implementation class to go with an interface. The
interface defines the type, perhaps providing some default methods, while the
skeletal implementation class implements the remaining non-primitive interface