CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
84
The performance problem is magnified if you perform a multistep operation
that generates a new object at every step, eventually discarding all objects except
the final result. There are two approaches to coping with this problem. The first is
to guess which multistep operations will be commonly required and to provide
them as primitives. If a multistep operation is provided as a primitive, the
immutable class does not have to create a separate object at each step. Internally,
the immutable class can be arbitrarily clever. For example, BigInteger has a pack-
age-private mutable “companion class” that it uses to speed up multistep operations
such as modular exponentiation. It is much harder to use the mutable companion
class than to use BigInteger, for all of the reasons outlined earlier. Luckily, you
don’t have to use it: the implementors of BigInteger did the hard work for you.
The package-private mutable companion class approach works fine if you can
accurately predict which complex operations clients will want to perform on your
immutable class. If not, then your best bet is to provide a public mutable
companion class. The main example of this approach in the Java platform libraries
is the String class, whose mutable companion is StringBuilder (and its
obsolete predecessor, StringBuffer).
Now that you know how to make an immutable class and you understand the
pros and cons of immutability, let’s discuss a few design alternatives. Recall that
to guarantee immutability, a class must not permit itself to be subclassed. This can
be done by making the class final, but there is another, more flexible alternative.
Instead of making an immutable class final, you can make all of its constructors
private or package-private and add public static factories in place of the public
constructors (Item 1). To make this concrete, here’s how Complex would look if
you took this approach:
// Immutable class with static factories instead of constructors
public class Complex {
private final double re;
private final double im;
private Complex(double re, double im) {
this.re = re;
this.im = im;
}
public static Complex valueOf(double re, double im) {
return new Complex(re, im);
}
... // Remainder unchanged
}