ITEM 70: USE CHECKED EXCEPTIONS FOR RECOVERABLE CONDITIONS
297
exception. If it isn’t clear whether recovery is possible, you’re probably better off
using an unchecked exception, for reasons discussed in Item 71.
While the Java Language Specification does not require it, there is a strong
convention that errors are reserved for use by the JVM to indicate resource
deficiencies, invariant failures, or other conditions that make it impossible to
continue execution. Given the almost universal acceptance of this convention, it’s
best not to implement any new Error subclasses. Therefore, all of the unchecked
throwables you implement should subclass RuntimeException (directly or
indirectly). Not only shouldn’t you define Error subclasses, but with the
exception of AssertionError, you shouldn’t throw them either.
It is possible to define a throwable that is not a subclass of Exception,
RuntimeException, or Error. The JLS doesn’t address such throwables directly
but specifies implicitly that they behave as ordinary checked exceptions (which
are subclasses of Exception but not RuntimeException). So when should you
use such a beast? In a word, never. They have no benefits over ordinary checked
exceptions and would serve merely to confuse the user of your API.
API designers often forget that exceptions are full-fledged objects on which
arbitrary methods can be defined. The primary use of such methods is to provide
code that catches the exception with additional information concerning the
condition that caused the exception to be thrown. In the absence of such methods,
programmers have been known to parse the string representation of an exception
to ferret out additional information. This is extremely bad practice (Item 12).
Throwable classes seldom specify the details of their string representations, so
string representations can differ from implementation to implementation and
release to release. Therefore, code that parses the string representation of an
exception is likely to be nonportable and fragile.
Because checked exceptions generally indicate recoverable conditions, it’s
especially important for them to provide methods that furnish information to help
the caller recover from the exceptional condition. For example, suppose a checked
exception is thrown when an attempt to make a purchase with a gift card fails due
to insufficient funds. The exception should provide an accessor method to query
the amount of the shortfall. This will enable the caller to relay the amount to the
shopper. See Item 75 for more on this topic.
To summarize, throw checked exceptions for recoverable conditions and
unchecked exceptions for programming errors. When in doubt, throw unchecked
exceptions. Don’t define any throwables that are neither checked exceptions nor
runtime exceptions. Provide methods on your checked exceptions to aid in
recovery.