ITEM 41: USE MARKER INTERFACES TO DEFINE TYPES
191
Item 41: Use marker interfaces to define types
A marker interface is an interface that contains no method declarations but merely
designates (or “marks”) a class that implements the interface as having some
property. For example, consider the Serializable interface (Chapter 12). By
implementing this interface, a class indicates that its instances can be written to an
ObjectOutputStream (or “serialized”).
You may hear it said that marker annotations (Item 39) make marker inter-
faces obsolete. This assertion is incorrect. Marker interfaces have two advantages
over marker annotations. First and foremost, marker interfaces define a type
that is implemented by instances of the marked class; marker annotations do
not. The existence of a marker interface type allows you to catch errors at compile
time that you couldn’t catch until runtime if you used a marker annotation.
Java’s serialization facility (Chapter 6) uses the Serializable marker inter-
face to indicate that a type is serializable. The ObjectOutputStream.writeObject
method, which serializes the object that is passed to it, requires that its argument be
serializable. Had the argument of this method been of type Serializable, an
attempt to serialize an inappropriate object would have been detected at compile
time (by type checking). Compile-time error detection is the intent of marker inter-
faces, but unfortunately, the ObjectOutputStream.write API does not take
advantage of the Serializable interface: its argument is declared to be of type
Object, so attempts to serialize an unserializable object won’t fail until runtime.
Another advantage of marker interfaces over marker annotations is that
they can be targeted more precisely. If an annotation type is declared with target
ElementType.TYPE, it can be applied to any class or interface. Suppose you have
a marker that is applicable only to implementations of a particular interface. If you
define it as a marker interface, you can have it extend the sole interface to which it
is applicable, guaranteeing that all marked types are also subtypes of the sole
interface to which it is applicable.
Arguably, the Set interface is just such a restricted marker interface. It is
applicable only to Collection subtypes, but it adds no methods beyond those
defined by Collection. It is not generally considered to be a marker interface
because it refines the contracts of several Collection methods, including add,
equals, and hashCode. But it is easy to imagine a marker interface that is applica-
ble only to subtypes of some particular interface and does not refine the contracts
of any of the interface’s methods. Such a marker interface might describe some
invariant of the entire object or indicate that instances are eligible for processing