ITEM 45: USE STREAMS JUDICIOUSLY
203
Item 45: Use streams judiciously
The streams API was added in Java 8 to ease the task of performing bulk operations,
sequentially or in parallel. This API provides two key abstractions: the stream,
which represents a finite or infinite sequence of data elements, and the stream pipe-
line, which represents a multistage computation on these elements. The elements in
a stream can come from anywhere. Common sources include collections, arrays,
files, regular expression pattern matchers, pseudorandom number generators, and
other streams. The data elements in a stream can be object references or primitive
values. Three primitive types are supported: int, long, and double.
A stream pipeline consists of a source stream followed by zero or more
intermediate operations and one terminal operation. Each intermediate operation
transforms the stream in some way, such as mapping each element to a function of
that element or filtering out all elements that do not satisfy some condition.
Intermediate operations all transform one stream into another, whose element type
may be the same as the input stream or different from it. The terminal operation
performs a final computation on the stream resulting from the last intermediate
operation, such as storing its elements into a collection, returning a certain
element, or printing all of its elements.
Stream pipelines are evaluated lazily: evaluation doesn’t start until the
terminal operation is invoked, and data elements that aren’t required in order to
complete the terminal operation are never computed. This lazy evaluation is what
makes it possible to work with infinite streams. Note that a stream pipeline
without a terminal operation is a silent no-op, so don’t forget to include one.
The streams API is fluent: it is designed to allow all of the calls that comprise
a pipeline to be chained into a single expression. In fact, multiple pipelines can be
chained together into a single expression. 
By default, stream pipelines run sequentially. Making a pipeline execute in
parallel is as simple as invoking the parallel method on any stream in the pipe-
line, but it is seldom appropriate to do so (Item 48).
The streams API is sufficiently versatile that practically any computation can
be performed using streams, but just because you can doesn’t mean you should.
When used appropriately, streams can make programs shorter and clearer; when
used inappropriately, they can make programs difficult to read and maintain. There
are no hard and fast rules for when to use streams, but there are heuristics.
Consider the following program, which reads the words from a dictionary file
and prints all the anagram groups whose size meets a user-specified minimum.
Recall that two words are anagrams if they consist of the same letters in a different