ITEM 15: MINIMIZE THE ACCESSIBILITY OF CLASSES AND MEMBERS
77
module, accessibility is unaffected by export declarations. Using the module
system allows you to share classes among packages within a module without
making them visible to the entire world. Public and protected members of public
classes in unexported packages give rise to the two implicit access levels, which
are intramodular analogues of the normal public and protected levels. The need for
this kind of sharing is relatively rare and can often be eliminated by rearranging
the classes within your packages. 
Unlike the four main access levels, the two module-based levels are largely
advisory. If you place a module’s JAR file on your application’s class path instead
of its module path, the packages in the module revert to their non-modular behav-
ior: all of the public and protected members of the packages’ public classes have
their normal accessibility, regardless of whether the packages are exported by the
module [Reinhold, 1.2]. The one place where the newly introduced access levels
are strictly enforced is the JDK itself: the unexported packages in the Java libraries
are truly inaccessible outside of their modules.
Not only is the access protection afforded by modules of limited utility to the
typical Java programmer, and largely advisory in nature; in order to take
advantage of it, you must group your packages into modules, make all of their
dependencies explicit in module declarations, rearrange your source tree, and take
special actions to accommodate any access to non-modularized packages from
within your modules [Reinhold, 3]. It is too early to say whether modules will
achieve widespread use outside of the JDK itself. In the meantime, it seems best to
avoid them unless you have a compelling need.
To summarize, you should reduce accessibility of program elements as much
as possible (within reason). After carefully designing a minimal public API, you
should prevent any stray classes, interfaces, or members from becoming part of
the API. With the exception of public static final fields, which serve as constants,
public classes should have no public fields. Ensure that objects referenced by
public static final fields are immutable.