CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
2
Most items are illustrated with program examples. A key feature of this book
is that it contains code examples illustrating many design patterns and idioms.
Where appropriate, they are cross-referenced to the standard reference work in
this area [Gamma95].
Many items contain one or more program examples illustrating some practice
to be avoided. Such examples, sometimes known as antipatterns, are clearly
labeled with a comment such as // Never do this!. In each case, the item
explains why the example is bad and suggests an alternative approach.
This book is not for beginners: it assumes that you are already comfortable
with Java. If you are not, consider one of the many fine introductory texts, such as
Peter Sestoft’s Java Precisely [Sestoft16]. While Effective Java is designed to be
accessible to anyone with a working knowledge of the language, it should provide
food for thought even for advanced programmers.
Most of the rules in this book derive from a few fundamental principles.
Clarity and simplicity are of paramount importance. The user of a component
should never be surprised by its behavior. Components should be as small as
possible but no smaller. (As used in this book, the term component refers to any
reusable software element, from an individual method to a complex framework
consisting of multiple packages.) Code should be reused rather than copied. The
dependencies between components should be kept to a minimum. Errors should
be detected as soon as possible after they are made, ideally at compile time.
While the rules in this book do not apply 100 percent of the time, they do
characterize best programming practices in the great majority of cases. You
should not slavishly follow these rules, but violate them only occasionally and
with good reason. Learning the art of programming, like most other disciplines,
consists of first learning the rules and then learning when to break them.
For the most part, this book is not about performance. It is about writing
programs that are clear, correct, usable, robust, flexible, and maintainable. If you
can do that, it’s usually a relatively simple matter to get the performance you need
(Item 67). Some items do discuss performance concerns, and a few of these items
provide performance numbers. These numbers, which are introduced with the
phrase “On my machine,” should be regarded as approximate at best.
For what it’s worth, my machine is an aging homebuilt 3.5GHz quad-core
Intel Core i7-4770K with 16 gigabytes of DDR3-1866 CL9 RAM, running Azul’s
Zulu 9.0.0.15 release of OpenJDK, atop Microsoft Windows 7 Professional SP1
(64-bit).