ITEM 8: AVOID FINALIZERS AND CLEANERS
29
Item 8:
Avoid finalizers and cleaners
Finalizers are unpredictable, often dangerous, and generally unnecessary.
Their use can cause erratic behavior, poor performance, and portability problems.
Finalizers have a few valid uses, which we’ll cover later in this item, but as a rule,
you should avoid them. As of Java 9, finalizers have been deprecated, but they are
still being used by the Java libraries. The Java 9 replacement for finalizers is
cleaners. Cleaners are less dangerous than finalizers, but still unpredictable,
slow, and generally unnecessary.
C++ programmers are cautioned not to think of finalizers or cleaners as Java’s
analogue of C++ destructors. In C++, destructors are the normal way to reclaim
the resources associated with an object, a necessary counterpart to constructors. In
Java, the garbage collector reclaims the storage associated with an object when it
becomes unreachable, requiring no special effort on the part of the programmer.
C++ destructors are also used to reclaim other nonmemory resources. In Java, a
try-with-resources or try-finally block is used for this purpose (Item 9).
One shortcoming of finalizers and cleaners is that there is no guarantee they’ll
be executed promptly [JLS, 12.6]. It can take arbitrarily long between the time
that an object becomes unreachable and the time its finalizer or cleaner runs. This
means that you should never do anything time-critical in a finalizer or cleaner.
For example, it is a grave error to depend on a finalizer or cleaner to close files
because open file descriptors are a limited resource. If many files are left open as a
result of the system’s tardiness in running finalizers or cleaners, a program may
fail because it can no longer open files.
The promptness with which finalizers and cleaners are executed is primarily a
function of the garbage collection algorithm, which varies widely across imple-
mentations. The behavior of a program that depends on the promptness of finalizer
or cleaner execution may likewise vary. It is entirely possible that such a program
will run perfectly on the JVM on which you test it and then fail miserably on the
one favored by your most important customer.
Tardy finalization is not just a theoretical problem. Providing a finalizer for a
class can arbitrarily delay reclamation of its instances. A colleague debugged a
long-running GUI application that was mysteriously dying with an
OutOfMemoryError. Analysis revealed that at the time of its death, the application
had thousands of graphics objects on its finalizer queue just waiting to be finalized
and reclaimed. Unfortunately, the finalizer thread was running at a lower priority
than another application thread, so objects weren’t getting finalized at the rate
they became eligible for finalization. The language specification makes no guar-