CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
206
Even if you have little previous exposure to streams, this program is not hard
to understand. It opens the dictionary file in a try-with-resources block, obtaining
a stream consisting of all the lines in the file. The stream variable is named words
to suggest that each element in the stream is a word. The pipeline on this stream
has no intermediate operations; its terminal operation collects all the words into a
map that groups the words by their alphabetized form (Item 46). This is exactly
the same map that was constructed in both previous versions of the program. Then
a new Stream<List<String>> is opened on the values() view of the map. The
elements in this stream are, of course, the anagram groups. The stream is filtered
so that all of the groups whose size is less than minGroupSize are ignored, and
finally, the remaining groups are printed by the terminal operation forEach. 
Note that the lambda parameter names were chosen carefully. The parameter
g should really be named group, but the resulting line of code would be too wide
for the book. In the absence of explicit types, careful naming of lambda
parameters is essential to the readability of stream pipelines. 
Note also that word alphabetization is done in a separate alphabetize
method. This enhances readability by providing a name for the operation and keep-
ing implementation details out of the main program. Using helper methods is
even more important for readability in stream pipelines than in iterative code
because pipelines lack explicit type information and named temporary variables.
The alphabetize method could have been reimplemented to use streams, but
a stream-based alphabetize method would have been less clear, more difficult to
write correctly, and probably slower. These deficiencies result from Java’s lack of
support for primitive char streams (which is not to imply that Java should have
supported char streams; it would have been infeasible to do so). To demonstrate
the hazards of processing char values with streams, consider the following code:
"Hello world!".chars().forEach(System.out::print);
You might expect it to print Hello world!, but if you run it, you’ll find that it
prints 721011081081113211911111410810033. This happens because the ele-
ments of the stream returned by "Hello world!".chars() are not char values
but int values, so the int overloading of print is invoked. It is admittedly con-
fusing that a method named chars returns a stream of int values. You could fix
the program by using a cast to force the invocation of the correct overloading:
"Hello world!".chars().forEach(x -> System.out.print((char) x));
but ideally you should refrain from using streams to process char values.