CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
286
Item 67: Optimize judiciously
There are three aphorisms concerning optimization that everyone should know: 
More computing sins are committed in the name of efficiency (without neces-
sarily achieving it) than for any other single reason—including blind stupidity.
—William A. Wulf [Wulf72]
We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: prema-
ture optimization is the root of all evil.
—Donald E. Knuth [Knuth74]
We follow two rules in the matter of optimization:
Rule 1. Don’t do it.
Rule 2 (for experts only). Don’t do it yet—that is, not until you have a
perfectly clear and unoptimized solution.
—M. A. Jackson [Jackson75]
All of these aphorisms predate the Java programming language by two
decades. They tell a deep truth about optimization: it is easy to do more harm than
good, especially if you optimize prematurely. In the process, you may produce
software that is neither fast nor correct and cannot easily be fixed.
Don’t sacrifice sound architectural principles for performance. Strive to write
good programs rather than fast ones. If a good program is not fast enough, its
architecture will allow it to be optimized. Good programs embody the principle of
information hiding: where possible, they localize design decisions within individ-
ual components, so individual decisions can be changed without affecting the
remainder of the system (Item 15).
This does not mean that you can ignore performance concerns until your pro-
gram is complete. Implementation problems can be fixed by later optimization,
but pervasive architectural flaws that limit performance can be impossible to fix
without rewriting the system. Changing a fundamental facet of your design after
the fact can result in an ill-structured system that is difficult to maintain and
evolve. Therefore you must think about performance during the design process.
Strive to avoid design decisions that limit performance. The components
of a design that are most difficult to change after the fact are those specifying
interactions between components and with the outside world. Chief among these
design components are APIs, wire-level protocols, and persistent data formats.
Not only are these design components difficult or impossible to change after the
fact, but all of them can place significant limitations on the performance that a
system can ever achieve.