CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
294
reasoning that, since the VM checks the bounds of all array accesses, the normal
loop termination test—hidden by the compiler but still present in the for-each
loop—is redundant and should be avoided. There are three things wrong with this
reasoning:
• Because exceptions are designed for exceptional circumstances, there is little
incentive for JVM implementors to make them as fast as explicit tests.
• Placing code inside a try-catch block inhibits certain optimizations that JVM
implementations might otherwise perform.
• The standard idiom for looping through an array doesn’t necessarily result in
redundant checks. Many JVM implementations optimize them away.
In fact, the exception-based idiom is far slower than the standard one. On my
machine, the exception-based idiom is about twice as slow as the standard one for
arrays of one hundred elements.
Not only does the exception-based loop obfuscate the purpose of the code and
reduce its performance, but it’s not guaranteed to work. If there is a bug in the
loop, the use of exceptions for flow control can mask the bug, greatly
complicating the debugging process. Suppose the computation in the body of the
loop invokes a method that performs an out-of-bounds access to some unrelated
array. If a reasonable loop idiom were used, the bug would generate an uncaught
exception, resulting in immediate thread termination with a full stack trace. If the
misguided exception-based loop were used, the bug-related exception would be
caught and misinterpreted as a normal loop termination.
The moral of this story is simple: Exceptions are, as their name implies, to
be used only for exceptional conditions; they should never be used for
ordinary control flow. More generally, use standard, easily recognizable idioms
in preference to overly clever techniques that purport to offer better performance.
Even if the performance advantage is real, it may not remain in the face of steadily
improving platform implementations. The subtle bugs and maintenance headaches
that come from overly clever techniques, however, are sure to remain. 
This principle also has implications for API design. A well-designed API
must not force its clients to use exceptions for ordinary control flow. A class
with a “state-dependent” method that can be invoked only under certain
unpredictable conditions should generally have a separate “state-testing” method
indicating whether it is appropriate to invoke the state-dependent method. For
example, the Iterator interface has the state-dependent method next and the