ITEM 24: FAVOR STATIC MEMBER CLASSES OVER NONSTATIC
113
One common use of a nonstatic member class is to define an Adapter
[Gamma95] that allows an instance of the outer class to be viewed as an instance
of some unrelated class. For example, implementations of the Map interface typi-
cally use nonstatic member classes to implement their collection views, which are
returned by Map’s keySet, entrySet, and values methods. Similarly, implemen-
tations of the collection interfaces, such as Set and List, typically use nonstatic
member classes to implement their iterators:
// Typical use of a nonstatic member class
public class MySet<E> extends AbstractSet<E> {
... // Bulk of the class omitted
@Override public Iterator<E> iterator() {
return new MyIterator();
}
private class MyIterator implements Iterator<E> {
...
}
}
If you declare a member class that does not require access to an enclosing
instance, always put the static modifier in its declaration, making it a static
rather than a nonstatic member class. If you omit this modifier, each instance will
have a hidden extraneous reference to its enclosing instance. As previously men-
tioned, storing this reference takes time and space. More seriously, it can result in
the enclosing instance being retained when it would otherwise be eligible for gar-
bage collection (Item 7). The resulting memory leak can be catastrophic. It is
often difficult to detect because the reference is invisible.
A common use of private static member classes is to represent components of
the object represented by their enclosing class. For example, consider a Map
instance, which associates keys with values. Many Map implementations have an
internal Entry object for each key-value pair in the map. While each entry is asso-
ciated with a map, the methods on an entry (getKey, getValue, and setValue) do
not need access to the map. Therefore, it would be wasteful to use a nonstatic
member class to represent entries: a private static member class is best. If you
accidentally omit the static modifier in the entry declaration, the map will still
work, but each entry will contain a superfluous reference to the map, which wastes
space and time.
It is doubly important to choose correctly between a static and a nonstatic
member class if the class in question is a public or protected member of an