ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xviii
Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
I thank the readers of the first edition of this book for giving it such a kind and
enthusiastic reception, for taking its ideas to heart, and for letting me know what a
positive influence it had on them and their work. I thank the many professors who
used the book in their courses, and the many engineering teams that adopted it.
I thank the whole team at Addison-Wesley for their kindness, professionalism,
patience, and grace under pressure. Through it all, my editor Greg Doench
remained unflappable: a fine editor and a perfect gentleman. My production man-
ager, Julie Nahil, was everything that a production manager should be: diligent,
prompt, organized, and friendly. My copy editor, Barbara Wood, was meticulous
and tasteful.
I have once again been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable,
and I give my sincerest thanks to each of them. The core team, who reviewed
every chapter, consisted of Lexi Baugher, Cindy Bloch, Beth Bottos, Joe Bowbeer,
Brian Goetz, Tim Halloran, Brian Kernighan, Rob Konigsberg, Tim Peierls, Bill
Pugh, Yoshiki Shibata, Peter Stout, Peter Weinberger, and Frank Yellin. Other
reviewers included Pablo Bellver, Dan Bloch, Dan Bornstein, Kevin Bourrillion,
Martin Buchholz, Joe Darcy, Neal Gafter, Laurence Gonsalves, Aaron Green-
house, Barry Hayes, Peter Jones, Angelika Langer, Doug Lea, Bob Lee, Jeremy
Manson, Tom May, Mike McCloskey, Andriy Tereshchenko, and Paul Tyma.
Again, these reviewers made numerous suggestions that led to great improve-
ments in this book and saved me from many embarrassments. And again, any
remaining embarrassments are my responsibility.
I give special thanks to Doug Lea and Tim Peierls, who served as sounding
boards for many of the ideas in this book. Doug and Tim were unfailingly gener-
ous with their time and knowledge.
I thank my manager at Google, Prabha Krishna, for her continued support and
encouragement.
Finally, I thank my wife, Cindy Bloch, for encouraging me to write, for read-
ing each item in raw form, for helping me with Framemaker, for writing the index,
and for putting up with me while I wrote.