CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
196
Note that we’re using the DoubleBinaryOperator interface for the lambdas
that represent the enum constant’s behavior. This is one of the many predefined
functional interfaces in java.util.function (Item 44). It represents a function
that takes two double arguments and returns a double result.
Looking at the lambda-based Operation enum, you might think constant-
specific method bodies have outlived their usefulness, but this is not the case.
Unlike methods and classes, lambdas lack names and documentation; if a
computation isn’t self-explanatory, or exceeds a few lines, don’t put it in a
lambda. One line is ideal for a lambda, and three lines is a reasonable maximum.
If you violate this rule, it can cause serious harm to the readability of your
programs. If a lambda is long or difficult to read, either find a way to simplify it or
refactor your program to eliminate it. Also, the arguments passed to enum
constructors are evaluated in a static context. Thus, lambdas in enum constructors
can’t access instance members of the enum. Constant-specific class bodies are still
the way to go if an enum type has constant-specific behavior that is difficult to
understand, that can’t be implemented in a few lines, or that requires access to
instance fields or methods.
Likewise, you might think that anonymous classes are obsolete in the era of
lambdas. This is closer to the truth, but there are a few things you can do with
anonymous classes that you can’t do with lambdas. Lambdas are limited to func-
tional interfaces. If you want to create an instance of an abstract class, you can do
it with an anonymous class, but not a lambda. Similarly, you can use anonymous
classes to create instances of interfaces with multiple abstract methods. Finally, a
lambda cannot obtain a reference to itself. In a lambda, the this keyword refers to
the enclosing instance, which is typically what you want. In an anonymous class,
the this keyword refers to the anonymous class instance. If you need access to the
function object from within its body, then you must use an anonymous class.
Lambdas share with anonymous classes the property that you can’t reliably
serialize and deserialize them across implementations. Therefore, you should
rarely, if ever, serialize a lambda (or an anonymous class instance). If you have a
function object that you want to make serializable, such as a Comparator, use an
instance of a private static nested class (Item 24).
In summary, as of Java 8, lambdas are by far the best way to represent small
function objects. Don’t use anonymous classes for function objects unless you
have to create instances of types that aren’t functional interfaces. Also,
remember that lambdas make it so easy to represent small function objects that it
opens the door to functional programming techniques that were not previously
practical in Java.