CHAPTER 11
CONCURRENCY
332
To prevent this denial-of-service attack, you can use a private lock object
instead of using synchronized methods (which imply a publicly accessible lock):
// Private lock object idiom - thwarts denial-of-service attack
private final Object lock = new Object();
public void foo() {
synchronized(lock) {
...
}
}
Because the private lock object is inaccessible outside the class, it is impossible for
clients to interfere with the object’s synchronization. In effect, we are applying the
advice of Item 15 by encapsulating the lock object in the object it synchronizes.
Note that the lock field is declared final. This prevents you from inadver-
tently changing its contents, which could result in catastrophic unsynchronized
access (Item 78). We are applying the advice of Item 17, by minimizing the muta-
bility of the lock field. Lock fields should always be declared final. This is
true whether you use an ordinary monitor lock (as shown above) or a lock from
the java.util.concurrent.locks package.
The private lock object idiom can be used only on unconditionally thread-safe
classes. Conditionally thread-safe classes can’t use this idiom because they must
document which lock their clients are to acquire when performing certain method
invocation sequences.
The private lock object idiom is particularly well-suited to classes designed
for inheritance (Item 19). If such a class were to use its instances for locking, a
subclass could easily and unintentionally interfere with the operation of the base
class, or vice versa. By using the same lock for different purposes, the subclass
and the base class could end up “stepping on each other’s toes.” This is not just a
theoretical problem; it happened with the Thread class [Bloch05, Puzzle 77].
To summarize, every class should clearly document its thread safety properties
with a carefully worded prose description or a thread safety annotation. The
synchronized modifier plays no part in this documentation. Conditionally thread-
safe classes must document which method invocation sequences require external
synchronization and which lock to acquire when executing these sequences. If you
write an unconditionally thread-safe class, consider using a private lock object in
place of synchronized methods. This protects you against synchronization
interference by clients and subclasses and gives you more flexibility to adopt a
sophisticated approach to concurrency control in a later release.