ITEM 48: USE CAUTION WHEN MAKING STREAMS PARALLEL
223
it takes roughly twice as long to find each Mersenne prime as it did to find the pre-
vious one. Thus, the cost of computing a single extra element is roughly equal to
the cost of computing all previous elements combined, and this innocuous-looking
pipeline brings the automatic parallelization algorithm to its knees. The moral of
this story is simple: Do not parallelize stream pipelines indiscriminately. The
performance consequences may be disastrous.
As a rule, performance gains from parallelism are best on streams over
ArrayList, HashMap, HashSet, and ConcurrentHashMap instances; arrays; int
ranges; and long ranges. What these data structures have in common is that they
can all be accurately and cheaply split into subranges of any desired sizes, which
makes it easy to divide work among parallel threads. The abstraction used by the
streams library to perform this task is the spliterator, which is returned by the
spliterator method on Stream and Iterable.
Another important factor that all of these data structures have in common is
that they provide good-to-excellent locality of reference when processed sequen-
tially: sequential element references are stored together in memory. The objects
referred to by those references may not be close to one another in memory, which
reduces locality-of-reference. Locality-of-reference turns out to be critically
important for parallelizing bulk operations: without it, threads spend much of their
time idle, waiting for data to be transferred from memory into the processor’s
cache. The data structures with the best locality of reference are primitive arrays
because the data itself is stored contiguously in memory.
The nature of a stream pipeline’s terminal operation also affects the effective-
ness of parallel execution. If a significant amount of work is done in the terminal
operation compared to the overall work of the pipeline and that operation is inher-
ently sequential, then parallelizing the pipeline will have limited effectiveness.
The best terminal operations for parallelism are reductions, where all of the
elements emerging from the pipeline are combined using one of Stream’s reduce
methods, or prepackaged reductions such as min, max, count, and sum. The short-
circuiting operations anyMatch, allMatch, and noneMatch are also amenable to
parallelism. The operations performed by Stream’s collect method, which are
known as mutable reductions, are not good candidates for parallelism because the
overhead of combining collections is costly.
If you write your own Stream, Iterable, or Collection implementation and
you want decent parallel performance, you must override the spliterator
method and test the parallel performance of the resulting streams extensively.
Writing high-quality spliterators is difficult and beyond the scope of this book.