CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
86
ObjectInputStream.readUnshared methods, even if the default serialized form
is acceptable. Otherwise an attacker could create a mutable instance of your class.
This topic is covered in detail in Item 88.
To summarize, resist the urge to write a setter for every getter. Classes should
be immutable unless there’s a very good reason to make them mutable.
Immutable classes provide many advantages, and their only disadvantage is the
potential for performance problems under certain circumstances. You should
always make small value objects, such as PhoneNumber and Complex, immutable.
(There are several classes in the Java platform libraries, such as java.util.Date
and java.awt.Point, that should have been immutable but aren’t.) You should
seriously consider making larger value objects, such as String and BigInteger,
immutable as well. You should provide a public mutable companion class for your
immutable class only once you’ve confirmed that it’s necessary to achieve satis-
factory performance (Item 67).
There are some classes for which immutability is impractical. If a class
cannot be made immutable, limit its mutability as much as possible. Reducing
the number of states in which an object can exist makes it easier to reason about
the object and reduces the likelihood of errors. Therefore, make every field final
unless there is a compelling reason to make it nonfinal. Combining the advice of
this item with that of Item 15, your natural inclination should be to declare every
field private final unless there’s a good reason to do otherwise.
Constructors should create fully initialized objects with all of their invari-
ants established. Don’t provide a public initialization method separate from the
constructor or static factory unless there is a compelling reason to do so. Similarly,
don’t provide a “reinitialize” method that enables an object to be reused as if it
had been constructed with a different initial state. Such methods generally provide
little if any performance benefit at the expense of increased complexity.
The CountDownLatch class exemplifies these principles. It is mutable, but its
state space is kept intentionally small. You create an instance, use it once, and it’s
done: once the countdown latch’s count has reached zero, you may not reuse it.
A final note should be added concerning the Complex class in this item. This
example was meant only to illustrate immutability. It is not an industrial-strength
complex number implementation. It uses the standard formulas for complex
multiplication and division, which are not correctly rounded and provide poor
semantics for complex NaNs and infinities [Kahan91, Smith62, Thomas94].