CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
268
and two’s complement arithmetic. Luckily, you don’t have to do this—it’s been
done for you. It’s called Random.nextInt(int). You needn’t concern yourself
with the details of how it does its job (although you can study the documentation
or the source code if you’re curious). A senior engineer with a background in
algorithms spent a good deal of time designing, implementing, and testing this
method and then showed it to several experts in the field to make sure it was right.
Then the library was beta tested, released, and used extensively by millions of
programmers for almost two decades. No flaws have yet been found in the
method, but if a flaw were to be discovered, it would be fixed in the next release.
By using a standard library, you take advantage of the knowledge of the
experts who wrote it and the experience of those who used it before you. 
As of Java 7, you should no longer use Random. For most uses, the random
number generator of choice is now ThreadLocalRandom. It produces higher
quality random numbers, and it’s very fast. On my machine, it is 3.6 times faster
than Random. For fork join pools and parallel streams, use SplittableRandom.
A second advantage of using the libraries is that you don’t have to waste your
time writing ad hoc solutions to problems that are only marginally related to your
work. If you are like most programmers, you’d rather spend your time working on
your application than on the underlying plumbing.
A third advantage of using standard libraries is that their performance tends to
improve over time, with no effort on your part. Because many people use them
and because they’re used in industry-standard benchmarks, the organizations that
supply these libraries have a strong incentive to make them run faster. Many of the
Java platform libraries have been rewritten over the years, sometimes repeatedly,
resulting in dramatic performance improvements.
A fourth advantage of using libraries is that they tend to gain functionality
over time. If a library is missing something, the developer community will make it
known, and the missing functionality may get added in a subsequent release.
A final advantage of using the standard libraries is that you place your code in
the mainstream. Such code is more easily readable, maintainable, and reusable by
the multitude of developers. 
Given all these advantages, it seems only logical to use library facilities in
preference to ad hoc implementations, yet many programmers don’t. Why not?
Perhaps they don’t know the library facilities exist. Numerous features are
added to the libraries in every major release, and it pays to keep abreast of
these additions. Each time there is a major release of the Java platform, a web
page is published describing its new features. These pages are well worth reading
[Java8-feat, Java9-feat]. To reinforce this point, suppose you wanted to write a