CHAPTER 8
METHODS
234
In the accessors, unlike the constructor, it would be permissible to use the
clone method to make the defensive copies. This is so because we know that the
class of Period’s internal Date objects is java.util.Date, and not some
untrusted subclass. That said, you are generally better off using a constructor or
static factory to copy an instance, for reasons outlined in Item 13.
Defensive copying of parameters is not just for immutable classes. Any time
you write a method or constructor that stores a reference to a client-provided
object in an internal data structure, think about whether the client-provided object
is potentially mutable. If it is, think about whether your class could tolerate a
change in the object after it was entered into the data structure. If the answer is no,
you must defensively copy the object and enter the copy into the data structure in
place of the original. For example, if you are considering using a client-provided
object reference as an element in an internal Set instance or as a key in an internal
Map instance, you should be aware that the invariants of the set or map would be
corrupted if the object were modified after it is inserted.
The same is true for defensive copying of internal components prior to
returning them to clients. Whether or not your class is immutable, you should
think twice before returning a reference to an internal component that is mutable.
Chances are, you should return a defensive copy. Remember that nonzero-length
arrays are always mutable. Therefore, you should always make a defensive copy
of an internal array before returning it to a client. Alternatively, you could return
an immutable view of the array. Both of these techniques are shown in Item 15.
Arguably, the real lesson in all of this is that you should, where possible, use
immutable objects as components of your objects so that you that don’t have to
worry about defensive copying (Item 17). In the case of our Period example, use
Instant (or LocalDateTime or ZonedDateTime), unless you’re using a release
prior to Java 8. If you are using an earlier release, one option is to store the
primitive long returned by Date.getTime() in place of a Date reference.
There may be a performance penalty associated with defensive copying and it
isn’t always justified. If a class trusts its caller not to modify an internal
component, perhaps because the class and its client are both part of the same
package, then it may be appropriate to dispense with defensive copying. Under
these circumstances, the class documentation should make it clear that the caller
must not modify the affected parameters or return values.
Even across package boundaries, it is not always appropriate to make a
defensive copy of a mutable parameter before integrating it into an object. There
are some methods and constructors whose invocation indicates an explicit handoff
of the object referenced by a parameter. When invoking such a method, the client