CHAPTER 6
ENUMS AND ANNOTATIONS
192
by a method of some other class (in the way that the Serializable interface indi-
cates that instances are eligible for processing by ObjectOutputStream).
The chief advantage of marker annotations over marker interfaces is that
they are part of the larger annotation facility. Therefore, marker annotations
allow for consistency in annotation-based frameworks.
So when should you use a marker annotation and when should you use a
marker interface? Clearly you must use an annotation if the marker applies to any
program element other than a class or interface, because only classes and inter-
faces can be made to implement or extend an interface. If the marker applies only
to classes and interfaces, ask yourself the question “Might I want to write one or
more methods that accept only objects that have this marking?” If so, you should
use a marker interface in preference to an annotation. This will make it possible
for you to use the interface as a parameter type for the methods in question, which
will result in the benefit of compile-time type checking. If you can convince your-
self that you’ll never want to write a method that accepts only objects with the
marking, then you’re probably better off using a marker annotation. If, addition-
ally, the marking is part of a framework that makes heavy use of annotations, then
a marker annotation is the clear choice.
In summary, marker interfaces and marker annotations both have their uses. If
you want to define a type that does not have any new methods associated with it, a
marker interface is the way to go. If you want to mark program elements other
than classes and interfaces or to fit the marker into a framework that already
makes heavy use of annotation types, then a marker annotation is the correct
choice. If you find yourself writing a marker annotation type whose target is
ElementType.TYPE, take the time to figure out whether it really should be an
annotation type or whether a marker interface would be more appropriate.
In a sense, this item is the inverse of Item 22, which says, “If you don’t want
to define a type, don’t use an interface.” To a first approximation, this item says,
“If you do want to define a type, do use an interface.”