ITEM 85: PREFER ALTERNATIVES TO JAVA SERIALIZATION
341
The object graph consists of 201 HashSet instances, each of which contains 3
or fewer object references. The entire stream is 5,744 bytes long, yet the sun
would burn out long before you could deserialize it. The problem is that
deserializing a HashSet instance requires computing the hash codes of its
elements. The 2 elements of the root hash set are themselves hash sets containing
2 hash-set elements, each of which contains 2 hash-set elements, and so on,
100 levels deep. Therefore, deserializing the set causes the hashCode method to
be invoked over 2100 times. Other than the fact that the deserialization is taking
forever, the deserializer has no indication that anything is amiss. Few objects are
produced, and the stack depth is bounded.
So what can you do defend against these problems? You open yourself up to
attack whenever you deserialize a byte stream that you don’t trust. The best way
to avoid serialization exploits is never to deserialize anything. In the words of
the computer named Joshua in the 1983 movie WarGames, “the only winning
move is not to play.” There is no reason to use Java serialization in any new
system you write. There are other mechanisms for translating between objects
and byte sequences that avoid many of the dangers of Java serialization, while
offering numerous advantages, such as cross-platform support, high performance,
a large ecosystem of tools, and a broad community of expertise. In this book, we
refer to these mechanisms as cross-platform structured-data representations.
While others sometimes refer to them as serialization systems, this book avoids
that usage to prevent confusion with Java serialization.
What these representations have in common is that they’re far simpler than
Java serialization. They don’t support automatic serialization and deserialization
of arbitrary object graphs. Instead, they support simple, structured data-objects
consisting of a collection of attribute-value pairs. Only a few primitive and array
data types are supported. This simple abstraction turns out to be sufficient for
building extremely powerful distributed systems and simple enough to avoid the
serious problems that have plagued Java serialization since its inception.
The leading cross-platform structured data representations are JSON [JSON]
and Protocol Buffers, also known as protobuf [Protobuf]. JSON was designed by
Douglas Crockford for browser-server communication, and protocol buffers were
designed by Google for storing and interchanging structured data among its serv-
ers. Even though these representations are sometimes called language-neutral,
JSON was originally developed for JavaScript and protobuf for C++; both repre-
sentations retain vestiges of their origins. 
The most significant differences between JSON and protobuf are that JSON is
text-based and human-readable, whereas protobuf is binary and substantially more