CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
306
Item 75: Include failure-capture information in detail messages
When a program fails due to an uncaught exception, the system automatically prints
out the exception’s stack trace. The stack trace contains the exception’s string
representation, the result of invoking its toString method. This typically consists
of the exception’s class name followed by its detail message. Frequently this is the
only information that programmers or site reliability engineers will have when
investigating a software failure. If the failure is not easily reproducible, it may be
difficult or impossible to get any more information. Therefore, it is critically
important that the exception’s toString method return as much information as
possible concerning the cause of the failure. In other words, the detail message of an
exception should capture the failure for subsequent analysis.
To capture a failure, the detail message of an exception should contain the
values of all parameters and fields that contributed to the exception. For
example, the detail message of an IndexOutOfBoundsException should contain
the lower bound, the upper bound, and the index value that failed to lie between
the bounds. This information tells a lot about the failure. Any or all of the three
values could be wrong. The index could be one less than the lower bound or equal
to the upper bound (a “fencepost error”), or it could be a wild value, far too low or
high. The lower bound could be greater than the upper bound (a serious internal
invariant failure). Each of these situations points to a different problem, and it
greatly aids in the diagnosis if you know what sort of error you’re looking for.
One caveat concerns security-sensitive information. Because stack traces may
be seen by many people in the process of diagnosing and fixing software issues,
do not include passwords, encryption keys, and the like in detail messages.
While it is critical to include all of the pertinent data in the detail message of
an exception, it is generally unimportant to include a lot of prose. The stack trace
is intended to be analyzed in conjunction with the documentation and, if neces-
sary, source code. It generally contains the exact file and line number from which
the exception was thrown, as well as the files and line numbers of all other method
invocations on the stack. Lengthy prose descriptions of the failure are superfluous;
the information can be gleaned by reading the documentation and source code.
The detail message of an exception should not be confused with a user-level
error message, which must be intelligible to end users. Unlike a user-level error
message, the detail message is primarily for the benefit of programmers or site
reliability engineers, when analyzing a failure. Therefore, information content is
far more important than readability. User-level error messages are often localized,
whereas exception detail messages rarely are.