CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
92
Inheritance is appropriate only in circumstances where the subclass really is a
subtype of the superclass. In other words, a class B should extend a class A only if
an “is-a” relationship exists between the two classes. If you are tempted to have a
class B extend a class A, ask yourself the question: Is every B really an A? If you
cannot truthfully answer yes to this question, B should not extend A. If the answer
is no, it is often the case that B should contain a private instance of A and expose a
different API: A is not an essential part of B, merely a detail of its implementation.
There are a number of obvious violations of this principle in the Java platform
libraries. For example, a stack is not a vector, so Stack should not extend Vector.
Similarly, a property list is not a hash table, so Properties should not extend
Hashtable. In both cases, composition would have been preferable.
If you use inheritance where composition is appropriate, you needlessly
expose implementation details. The resulting API ties you to the original imple-
mentation, forever limiting the performance of your class. More seriously, by
exposing the internals you let clients access them directly. At the very least, it can
lead to confusing semantics. For example, if p refers to a Properties instance,
then p.getProperty(key) may yield different results from p.get(key): the for-
mer method takes defaults into account, while the latter method, which is inher-
ited from Hashtable, does not. Most seriously, the client may be able to corrupt
invariants of the subclass by modifying the superclass directly. In the case of
Properties, the designers intended that only strings be allowed as keys and val-
ues, but direct access to the underlying Hashtable allows this invariant to be vio-
lated. Once violated, it is no longer possible to use other parts of the Properties
API (load and store). By the time this problem was discovered, it was too late to
correct it because clients depended on the use of non-string keys and values.
There is one last set of questions you should ask yourself before deciding to
use inheritance in place of composition. Does the class that you contemplate
extending have any flaws in its API? If so, are you comfortable propagating those
flaws into your class’s API? Inheritance propagates any flaws in the superclass’s
API, while composition lets you design a new API that hides these flaws.
To summarize, inheritance is powerful, but it is problematic because it
violates encapsulation. It is appropriate only when a genuine subtype relationship
exists between the subclass and the superclass. Even then, inheritance may lead to
fragility if the subclass is in a different package from the superclass and the
superclass is not designed for inheritance. To avoid this fragility, use composition
and forwarding instead of inheritance, especially if an appropriate interface to
implement a wrapper class exists. Not only are wrapper classes more robust than
subclasses, they are also more powerful.