ITEM 69: USE EXCEPTIONS ONLY FOR EXCEPTIONAL CONDITIONS
295
corresponding state-testing method hasNext. This enables the standard idiom for
iterating over a collection with a traditional for loop (as well as the for-each loop,
where the hasNext method is used internally):
for (Iterator<Foo> i = collection.iterator(); i.hasNext(); ) {
Foo foo = i.next();
...
}
If Iterator lacked the hasNext method, clients would be forced to do this instead:
// Do not use this hideous code for iteration over a collection!
try {
Iterator<Foo> i = collection.iterator();
while(true) {
Foo foo = i.next();
...
}
} catch (NoSuchElementException e) {
}
This should look very familiar after the array iteration example that began this item.
In addition to being wordy and misleading, the exception-based loop is likely to
perform poorly and can mask bugs in unrelated parts of the system.
An alternative to providing a separate state-testing method is to have the state-
dependent method return an empty optional (Item 55) or a distinguished value
such as null if it cannot perform the desired computation.
Here are some guidelines to help you choose between a state-testing method
and an optional or distinguished return value. If an object is to be accessed
concurrently without external synchronization or is subject to externally induced
state transitions, you must use an optional or distinguished return value, as the
object’s state could change in the interval between the invocation of a state-testing
method and its state-dependent method. Performance concerns may dictate that an
optional or distinguished return value be used if a separate state-testing method
would duplicate the work of the state-dependent method. All other things being
equal, a state-testing method is mildly preferable to a distinguished return value. It
offers slightly better readability, and incorrect use may be easier to detect: if you
forget to call a state-testing method, the state-dependent method will throw an
exception, making the bug obvious; if you forget to check for a distinguished
return value, the bug may be subtle. This is not an issue for optional return values.
In summary, exceptions are designed for exceptional conditions. Don’t use
them for ordinary control flow, and don’t write APIs that force others to do so.