ITEM 8: AVOID FINALIZERS AND CLEANERS
33
Room’s close method calling Cleanable’s clean method. If the client fails to call
the close method by the time a Room instance is eligible for garbage collection,
the cleaner will (hopefully) call State’s run method.
It is critical that a State instance does not refer to its Room instance. If it did, it
would create a circularity that would prevent the Room instance from becoming
eligible for garbage collection (and from being automatically cleaned). Therefore,
State must be a static nested class because nonstatic nested classes contain
references to their enclosing instances (Item 24). It is similarly inadvisable to use
a lambda because they can easily capture references to enclosing objects.
As we said earlier, Room’s cleaner is used only as a safety net. If clients
surround all Room instantiations in try-with-resource blocks, automatic cleaning
will never be required. This well-behaved client demonstrates that behavior:
public class Adult {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        try (Room myRoom = new Room(7)) {
            System.out.println("Goodbye");
        }
    }
}
As you’d expect, running the Adult program prints Goodbye, followed by Clean-
ing room. But what about this ill-behaved program, which never cleans its room?
public class Teenager {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        new Room(99);
        System.out.println("Peace out");
    }
}
You might expect it to print Peace out, followed by Cleaning room, but on my
machine, it never prints Cleaning room; it just exits. This is the unpredictability
we spoke of earlier. The Cleaner spec says, “The behavior of cleaners during Sys-
tem.exit is implementation specific. No guarantees are made relating to whether
cleaning actions are invoked or not.” While the spec does not say it, the same holds
true for normal program exit. On my machine, adding the line System.gc() to
Teenager’s main method is enough to make it print Cleaning room prior to exit,
but there’s no guarantee that you’ll see the same behavior on your machine.
In summary, don’t use cleaners, or in releases prior to Java 9, finalizers,
except as a safety net or to terminate noncritical native resources. Even then,
beware the indeterminacy and performance consequences.