ITEM 19: DESIGN AND DOCUMENT FOR INHERITANCE OR ELSE PROHIBIT IT
93
Item 19: Design and document for inheritance or else prohibit it
Item 18 alerted you to the dangers of subclassing a “foreign” class that was not
designed and documented for inheritance. So what does it mean for a class to be
designed and documented for inheritance?
First, the class must document precisely the effects of overriding any method.
In other words, the class must document its self-use of overridable methods.
For each public or protected method, the documentation must indicate which
overridable methods the method invokes, in what sequence, and how the results of
each invocation affect subsequent processing. (By overridable, we mean nonfinal
and either public or protected.) More generally, a class must document any
circumstances under which it might invoke an overridable method. For example,
invocations might come from background threads or static initializers.
A method that invokes overridable methods contains a description of these
invocations at the end of its documentation comment. The description is in a
special section of the specification, labeled “Implementation Requirements,”
which is generated by the Javadoc tag @implSpec. This section describes the inner
workings of the method. Here’s an example, copied from the specification for
java.util.AbstractCollection:
public boolean remove(Object o)
Removes a single instance of the specified element from this collection, if it
is present (optional operation). More formally, removes an element e such
that Objects.equals(o, e), if this collection contains one or more such
elements. Returns true if this collection contained the specified element (or
equivalently, if this collection changed as a result of the call).
Implementation Requirements: This implementation iterates over the col-
lection looking for the specified element. If it finds the element, it removes
the element from the collection using the iterator’s remove method. Note that
this implementation throws an UnsupportedOperationException if the
iterator returned by this collection’s iterator method does not implement
the remove method and this collection contains the specified object.
This documentation leaves no doubt that overriding the iterator method will
affect the behavior of the remove method. It also describes exactly how the
behavior of the Iterator returned by the iterator method will affect the
behavior of the remove method. Contrast this to the situation in Item 18, where the
programmer subclassing HashSet simply could not say whether overriding the
add method would affect the behavior of the addAll method.