ITEM 47: PREFER COLLECTION TO STREAM AS A RETURN TYPE
219
Note that PowerSet.of throws an exception if the input set has more than 30
elements. This highlights a disadvantage of using Collection as a return type
rather than Stream or Iterable: Collection has an int-returning size method,
which limits the length of the returned sequence to Integer.MAX_VALUE, or 231 − 1.
The Collection specification does allow the size method to return 231 − 1 if the
collection is larger, even infinite, but this is not a wholly satisfying solution.
In order to write a Collection implementation atop AbstractCollection,
you need implement only two methods beyond the one required for Iterable:
contains and size. Often it’s easy to write efficient implementations of these
methods. If it isn’t feasible, perhaps because the contents of the sequence aren’t
predetermined before iteration takes place, return a stream or iterable, whichever
feels more natural. If you choose, you can return both using two separate methods.
There are times when you’ll choose the return type based solely on ease of
implementation. For example, suppose you want to write a method that returns all
of the (contiguous) sublists of an input list. It takes only three lines of code to
generate these sublists and put them in a standard collection, but the memory
required to hold this collection is quadratic in the size of the source list. While this
is not as bad as the power set, which is exponential, it is clearly unacceptable.
Implementing a custom collection, as we did for the power set, would be tedious,
more so because the JDK lacks a skeletal Iterator implementation to help us.
It is, however, straightforward to implement a stream of all the sublists of an
input list, though it does require a minor insight. Let’s call a sublist that contains
the first element of a list a prefix of the list. For example, the prefixes of (a, b, c)
are (a), (a, b), and (a, b, c). Similarly, let’s call a sublist that contains the last ele-
ment a suffix, so the suffixes of (a, b, c) are (a, b, c), (b, c), and (c). The insight is
that the sublists of a list are simply the suffixes of the prefixes (or identically, the
prefixes of the suffixes) and the empty list. This observation leads directly to a
clear, reasonably concise implementation:
// Returns a stream of all the sublists of its input list
public class SubLists {
public static <E> Stream<List<E>> of(List<E> list) {
return Stream.concat(Stream.of(Collections.emptyList()),
prefixes(list).flatMap(SubLists::suffixes));
}
private static <E> Stream<List<E>> prefixes(List<E> list) {
return IntStream.rangeClosed(1, list.size())
.mapToObj(end -> list.subList(0, end));
}