CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
116
tell you that you’ve multiply defined the classes Utensil and Dessert. This is so
because the compiler will first compile Main.java, and when it sees the reference
to Utensil (which precedes the reference to Dessert), it will look in
Utensil.java for this class and find both Utensil and Dessert. When the com-
piler encounters Dessert.java on the command line, it will pull in that file too,
causing it to encounter both definitions of Utensil and Dessert.
If you compile the program with the command javac Main.java or
javac Main.java Utensil.java, it will behave as it did before you wrote the
Dessert.java file, printing pancake. But if you compile the program with the
command javac Dessert.java Main.java, it will print potpie. The behavior
of the program is thus affected by the order in which the source files are passed to
the compiler, which is clearly unacceptable.
Fixing the problem is as simple as splitting the top-level classes (Utensil and
Dessert, in the case of our example) into separate source files. If you are tempted
to put multiple top-level classes into a single source file, consider using static
member classes (Item 24) as an alternative to splitting the classes into separate
source files. If the classes are subservient to another class, making them into static
member classes is generally the better alternative because it enhances readability
and makes it possible to reduce the accessibility of the classes by declaring them
private (Item 15). Here is how our example looks with static member classes:
// Static member classes instead of multiple top-level classes
public class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(Utensil.NAME + Dessert.NAME);
    }
    private static class Utensil {
        static final String NAME = "pan";
    }
    private static class Dessert {
        static final String NAME = "cake";
    }
}
The lesson is clear: Never put multiple top-level classes or interfaces in a
single source file. Following this rule guarantees that you can’t have multiple
definitions for a single class at compile time. This in turn guarantees that the class
files generated by compilation, and the behavior of the resulting program, are
independent of the order in which the source files are passed to the compiler.