CHAPTER 2
CREATING AND DESTROYING OBJECTS
30
antees as to which thread will execute finalizers, so there is no portable way to
prevent this sort of problem other than to refrain from using finalizers. Cleaners
are a bit better than finalizers in this regard because class authors have control
over their own cleaner threads, but cleaners still run in the background, under the
control of the garbage collector, so there can be no guarantee of prompt cleaning.
Not only does the specification provide no guarantee that finalizers or
cleaners will run promptly; it provides no guarantee that they’ll run at all. It is
entirely possible, even likely, that a program terminates without running them on
some objects that are no longer reachable. As a consequence, you should never
depend on a finalizer or cleaner to update persistent state. For example,
depending on a finalizer or cleaner to release a persistent lock on a shared
resource such as a database is a good way to bring your entire distributed system
to a grinding halt.
Don’t be seduced by the methods System.gc and System.runFinalization.
They may increase the odds of finalizers or cleaners getting executed, but they don’t
guarantee it. Two methods once claimed to make this guarantee: System.run-
FinalizersOnExit and its evil twin, Runtime.runFinalizersOnExit. These
methods are fatally flawed and have been deprecated for decades [ThreadStop].
Another problem with finalizers is that an uncaught exception thrown during
finalization is ignored, and finalization of that object terminates [JLS, 12.6].
Uncaught exceptions can leave other objects in a corrupt state. If another thread
attempts to use such a corrupted object, arbitrary nondeterministic behavior may
result. Normally, an uncaught exception will terminate the thread and print a stack
trace, but not if it occurs in a finalizer—it won’t even print a warning. Cleaners do
not have this problem because a library using a cleaner has control over its thread.
There is a severe performance penalty for using finalizers and cleaners. On
my machine, the time to create a simple AutoCloseable object, to close it using
try-with-resources, and to have the garbage collector reclaim it is about 12 ns.
Using a finalizer instead increases the time to 550 ns. In other words, it is about 50
times slower to create and destroy objects with finalizers. This is primarily because
finalizers inhibit efficient garbage collection. Cleaners are comparable in speed to
finalizers if you use them to clean all instances of the class (about 500 ns per
instance on my machine), but cleaners are much faster if you use them only as a
safety net, as discussed below. Under these circumstances, creating, cleaning, and
destroying an object takes about 66 ns on my machine, which means you pay a
factor of five (not fifty) for the insurance of a safety net if you don’t use it.
Finalizers have a serious security problem: they open your class up to
finalizer attacks. The idea behind a finalizer attack is simple: If an exception is