CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
224
Not only can parallelizing a stream lead to poor performance, including
liveness failures; it can lead to incorrect results and unpredictable behavior
(safety failures). Safety failures may result from parallelizing a pipeline that uses
mappers, filters, and other programmer-supplied function objects that fail to adhere
to their specifications. The Stream specification places stringent requirements on
these function objects. For example, the accumulator and combiner functions
passed to Stream’s reduce operation must be associative, non-interfering, and
stateless. If you violate these requirements (some of which are discussed in Item 46)
but run your pipeline sequentially, it will likely yield correct results; if you paral-
lelize it, it will likely fail, perhaps catastrophically.
Along these lines, it’s worth noting that even if the parallelized Mersenne
primes program had run to completion, it would not have printed the primes in the
correct (ascending) order. To preserve the order displayed by the sequential version,
you’d have to replace the forEach terminal operation with forEachOrdered, which
is guaranteed to traverse parallel streams in encounter order.
Even assuming that you’re using an efficiently splittable source stream, a par-
allelizable or cheap terminal operation, and non-interfering function objects, you
won’t get a good speedup from parallelization unless the pipeline is doing enough
real work to offset the costs associated with parallelism. As a very rough estimate,
the number of elements in the stream times the number of lines of code executed
per element should be at least a hundred thousand [Lea14].
It’s important to remember that parallelizing a stream is strictly a performance
optimization. As is the case for any optimization, you must test the performance
before and after the change to ensure that it is worth doing (Item 67). Ideally, you
should perform the test in a realistic system setting. Normally, all parallel stream
pipelines in a program run in a common fork-join pool. A single misbehaving
pipeline can harm the performance of others in unrelated parts of the system.
If it sounds like the odds are stacked against you when parallelizing stream
pipelines, it’s because they are. An acquaintance who maintains a multimillion-
line codebase that makes heavy use of streams found only a handful of places
where parallel streams were effective. This does not mean that you should refrain
from parallelizing streams. Under the right circumstances, it is possible to
achieve near-linear speedup in the number of processor cores simply by add-
ing a parallel call to a stream pipeline. Certain domains, such as machine
learning and data processing, are particularly amenable to these speedups.