CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
288
Profiling tools can help you decide where to focus your optimization efforts.
These tools give you runtime information, such as roughly how much time each
method is consuming and how many times it is invoked. In addition to focusing
your tuning efforts, this can alert you to the need for algorithmic changes. If a
quadratic (or worse) algorithm lurks inside your program, no amount of tuning
will fix the problem. You must replace the algorithm with one that is more
efficient. The more code in the system, the more important it is to use a profiler.
It’s like looking for a needle in a haystack: the bigger the haystack, the more useful
it is to have a metal detector. Another tool that deserves special mention is jmh,
which is not a profiler but a microbenchmarking framework that provides
unparalleled visibility into the detailed performance of Java code [JMH].
The need to measure the effects of attempted optimization is even greater in
Java than in more traditional languages such as C and C++, because Java has a
weaker performance model: The relative cost of the various primitive operations is
less well defined. The “abstraction gap” between what the programmer writes and
what the CPU executes is greater, which makes it even more difficult to reliably
predict the performance consequences of optimizations. There are plenty of
performance myths floating around that turn out to be half-truths or outright lies.
Not only is Java’s performance model ill-defined, but it varies from
implementation to implementation, from release to release, and from processor to
processor. If you will be running your program on multiple implementations or
multiple hardware platforms, it is important that you measure the effects of your
optimization on each. Occasionally you may be forced to make trade-offs between
performance on different implementations or hardware platforms.
In the nearly two decades since this item was first written, every component of
the Java software stack has grown in complexity, from processors to VMs to librar-
ies, and the variety of hardware on which Java runs has grown immensely. All of
this has combined to make the performance of Java programs even less predictable
now than it was in 2001, with a corresponding increase in the need to measure it.
To summarize, do not strive to write fast programs—strive to write good ones;
speed will follow. But do think about performance while you’re designing systems,
especially while you’re designing APIs, wire-level protocols, and persistent data
formats. When you’ve finished building the system, measure its performance. If
it’s fast enough, you’re done. If not, locate the source of the problem with the aid of
a profiler and go to work optimizing the relevant parts of the system. The first step
is to examine your choice of algorithms: no amount of low-level optimization can
make up for a poor choice of algorithm. Repeat this process as necessary,
measuring the performance after every change, until you’re satisfied.