CHAPTER 8
METHODS
242
Here’s what’s happening: The call to set.remove(i) selects the overloading
remove(E), where E is the element type of the set (Integer), and autoboxes i
from int to Integer. This is the behavior you’d expect, so the program ends up
removing the positive values from the set. The call to list.remove(i), on the
other hand, selects the overloading remove(int i), which removes the element at
the specified position in the list. If you start with the list [-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2]
and remove the zeroth element, then the first, and then the second, you’re left with
[-2, 0, 2], and the mystery is solved. To fix the problem, cast list.remove’s
argument to Integer, forcing the correct overloading to be selected. Alternatively,
you could invoke Integer.valueOf on i and pass the result to list.remove.
Either way, the program prints [-3, -2, -1] [-3, -2, -1], as expected:
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
set.remove(i);
list.remove((Integer) i);
// or remove(Integer.valueOf(i))
}
The confusing behavior demonstrated by the previous example came about
because the List<E> interface has two overloadings of the remove method:
remove(E) and remove(int). Prior to Java 5 when the List interface was
“generified,” it had a remove(Object) method in place of remove(E), and the
corresponding parameter types, Object and int, were radically different. But in
the presence of generics and autoboxing, the two parameter types are no longer
radically different. In other words, adding generics and autoboxing to the
language damaged the List interface. Luckily, few if any other APIs in the Java
libraries were similarly damaged, but this tale makes it clear that autoboxing and
generics increased the importance of caution when overloading.
The addition of lambdas and method references in Java 8 further increased the
potential for confusion in overloading. For example, consider these two snippets:
new Thread(System.out::println).start();
ExecutorService exec = Executors.newCachedThreadPool();
exec.submit(System.out::println);
While the Thread constructor invocation and the submit method invocation look
similar, the former compiles while the latter does not. The arguments are identical
(System.out::println), and both the constructor and the method have an
overloading that takes a Runnable. What’s going on here? The surprising answer
is that the submit method has an overloading that takes a Callable<T>, while the
Thread constructor does not. You might think that this shouldn’t make any