ITEM 23: PREFER CLASS HIERARCHIES TO TAGGED CLASSES
111
class Rectangle extends Figure {
final double length;
final double width;
Rectangle(double length, double width) {
this.length = length;
this.width  = width;
}
@Override double area() { return length * width; }
}
This class hierarchy corrects every shortcoming of tagged classes noted previ-
ously. The code is simple and clear, containing none of the boilerplate found in the
original. The implementation of each flavor is allotted its own class, and none of
these classes is encumbered by irrelevant data fields. All fields are final. The com-
piler ensures that each class’s constructor initializes its data fields and that each
class has an implementation for every abstract method declared in the root class.
This eliminates the possibility of a runtime failure due to a missing switch case.
Multiple programmers can extend the hierarchy independently and interoperably
without access to the source for the root class. There is a separate data type associ-
ated with each flavor, allowing programmers to indicate the flavor of a variable
and to restrict variables and input parameters to a particular flavor.
Another advantage of class hierarchies is that they can be made to reflect
natural hierarchical relationships among types, allowing for increased flexibility
and better compile-time type checking. Suppose the tagged class in the original
example also allowed for squares. The class hierarchy could be made to reflect the
fact that a square is a special kind of rectangle (assuming both are immutable):
class Square extends Rectangle {
Square(double side) {
super(side, side);
}
}
Note that the fields in the above hierarchy are accessed directly rather than by
accessor methods. This was done for brevity and would be a poor design if the
hierarchy were public (Item 16).
In summary, tagged classes are seldom appropriate. If you’re tempted to write
a class with an explicit tag field, think about whether the tag could be eliminated
and the class replaced by a hierarchy. When you encounter an existing class with a
tag field, consider refactoring it into a hierarchy.