ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xix
Acknowledgments for the First Edition
I thank Patrick Chan for suggesting that I write this book and for pitching the idea to
Lisa Friendly, the series managing editor; Tim Lindholm, the series technical editor;
and Mike Hendrickson, executive editor of Addison-Wesley. I thank Lisa, Tim, and
Mike for encouraging me to pursue the project and for their superhuman patience
and unyielding faith that I would someday write this book.
I thank James Gosling and his original team for giving me something great to
write about, and I thank the many Java platform engineers who followed in
James’s footsteps. In particular, I thank my colleagues in Sun’s Java Platform
Tools and Libraries Group for their insights, their encouragement, and their sup-
port. The team consists of Andrew Bennett, Joe Darcy, Neal Gafter, Iris Garcia,
Konstantin Kladko, Ian Little, Mike McCloskey, and Mark Reinhold. Former
members include Zhenghua Li, Bill Maddox, and Naveen Sanjeeva. 
I thank my manager, Andrew Bennett, and my director, Larry Abrahams, for
lending their full and enthusiastic support to this project. I thank Rich Green, the
VP of Engineering at Java Software, for providing an environment where engi-
neers are free to think creatively and to publish their work.
I have been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable, and I give my
sincerest thanks to each of them: Andrew Bennett, Cindy Bloch, Dan Bloch, Beth
Bottos, Joe Bowbeer, Gilad Bracha, Mary Campione, Joe Darcy, David Eckhardt,
Joe Fialli, Lisa Friendly, James Gosling, Peter Haggar, David Holmes, Brian
Kernighan, Konstantin Kladko, Doug Lea, Zhenghua Li, Tim Lindholm, Mike
McCloskey, Tim Peierls, Mark Reinhold, Ken Russell, Bill Shannon, Peter Stout,
Phil Wadler, and two anonymous reviewers. They made numerous suggestions
that led to great improvements in this book and saved me from many
embarrassments. Any remaining embarrassments are my responsibility.
Numerous colleagues, inside and outside Sun, participated in technical
discussions that improved the quality of this book. Among others, Ben Gomes,
Steffen Grarup, Peter Kessler, Richard Roda, John Rose, and David Stoutamire
contributed useful insights. A special thanks is due Doug Lea, who served as a
sounding board for many of the ideas in this book. Doug has been unfailingly
generous with his time and his knowledge.
I thank Julie Dinicola, Jacqui Doucette, Mike Hendrickson, Heather Olszyk,
Tracy Russ, and the whole team at Addison-Wesley for their support and profes-
sionalism. Even under an impossibly tight schedule, they were always friendly
and accommodating.