ITEM 10: OBEY THE GENERAL CONTRACT WHEN OVERRIDING EQUALS
47
4. For each “significant” field in the class, check if that field of the argument
matches the corresponding field of this object. If all these tests succeed, re-
turn true; otherwise, return false. If the type in Step 2 is an interface, you
must access the argument’s fields via interface methods; if the type is a class,
you may be able to access the fields directly, depending on their accessibility. 
For primitive fields whose type is not float or double, use the == operator for
comparisons; for object reference fields, call the equals method recursively;
for float fields, use the static Float.compare(float, float) method; and
for double fields, use Double.compare(double, double). The special treat-
ment of float and double fields is made necessary by the existence of
Float.NaN, -0.0f and the analogous double values; see JLS 15.21.1 or the
documentation of Float.equals for details. While you could compare float
and double fields with the static methods Float.equals and Double.equals,
this would entail autoboxing on every comparison, which would have poor
performance. For array fields, apply these guidelines to each element. If every
element in an array field is significant, use one of the Arrays.equals methods.
Some object reference fields may legitimately contain null. To avoid the
possibility of a NullPointerException, check such fields for equality using
the static method Objects.equals(Object, Object).
For some classes, such as CaseInsensitiveString above, field comparisons
are more complex than simple equality tests. If this is the case, you may want
to store a canonical form of the field so the equals method can do a cheap ex-
act comparison on canonical forms rather than a more costly nonstandard com-
parison. This technique is most appropriate for immutable classes (Item 17); if
the object can change, you must keep the canonical form up to date.
The performance of the equals method may be affected by the order in which
fields are compared. For best performance, you should first compare fields that
are more likely to differ, less expensive to compare, or, ideally, both. You must
not compare fields that are not part of an object’s logical state, such as lock
fields used to synchronize operations. You need not compare derived fields,
which can be calculated from “significant fields,” but doing so may improve
the performance of the equals method. If a derived field amounts to a summa-
ry description of the entire object, comparing this field will save you the ex-
pense of comparing the actual data if the comparison fails. For example,
suppose you have a Polygon class, and you cache the area. If two polygons
have unequal areas, you needn’t bother comparing their edges and vertices.