ITEM 59: KNOW AND USE THE LIBRARIES
269
program to print the contents of a URL specified on the command line (which is
roughly what the Linux curl command does). Prior to Java 9, this code was a bit
tedious, but in Java 9 the transferTo method was added to InputStream. Here is
a complete program to perform this task using this new method:
// Printing the contents of a URL with transferTo, added in Java 9
public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
try (InputStream in = new URL(args[0]).openStream()) {
in.transferTo(System.out);
}
}
The libraries are too big to study all the documentation [Java9-api], but every
programmer should be familiar with the basics of java.lang, java.util, and
java.io, and their subpackages. Knowledge of other libraries can be acquired
on an as-needed basis. It is beyond the scope of this item to summarize the facili-
ties in the libraries, which have grown immense over the years. 
Several libraries bear special mention. The collections framework and the
streams library (Items 45–48) should be part of every programmer’s basic toolkit,
as should parts of the concurrency utilities in java.util.concurrent. This
package contains both high-level utilities to simplify the task of multithreaded
programming and low-level primitives to allow experts to write their own higher-
level concurrent abstractions. The high-level parts of java.util.concurrent are
discussed in Items 80 and 81.
Occasionally, a library facility can fail to meet your needs. The more special-
ized your needs, the more likely this is to happen. While your first impulse should
be to use the libraries, if you’ve looked at what they have to offer in some area and
it doesn’t meet your needs, then use an alternate implementation. There will
always be holes in the functionality provided by any finite set of libraries. If you
can’t find what you need in Java platform libraries, your next choice should be to
look in high-quality third-party libraries, such as Google’s excellent, open source
Guava library [Guava]. If you can’t find the functionality that you need in any
appropriate library, you may have no choice but to implement it yourself.
To summarize, don’t reinvent the wheel. If you need to do something that
seems like it should be reasonably common, there may already be a facility in the
libraries that does what you want. If there is, use it; if you don’t know, check.
Generally speaking, library code is likely to be better than code that you’d write
yourself and is likely to improve over time. This is no reflection on your abilities
as a programmer. Economies of scale dictate that library code receives far more
attention than most developers could afford to devote to the same functionality.