CHAPTER 3
METHODS COMMON TO ALL OBJECTS
64
value mapping in the hash table being cloned. This approach typically yields a
simple, reasonably elegant clone method that does not run as quickly as one that
directly manipulates the innards of the clone. While this approach is clean, it is
antithetical to the whole Cloneable architecture because it blindly overwrites the
field-by-field object copy that forms the basis of the architecture.
Like a constructor, a clone method must never invoke an overridable method
on the clone under construction (Item 19). If clone invokes a method that is over-
ridden in a subclass, this method will execute before the subclass has had a chance
to fix its state in the clone, quite possibly leading to corruption in the clone and the
original. Therefore, the put(key, value) method discussed in the previous para-
graph should be either final or private. (If it is private, it is presumably the “helper
method” for a nonfinal public method.)
Object’s clone method is declared to throw CloneNotSupportedException,
but overriding methods need not. Public clone methods should omit the throws
clause, as methods that don’t throw checked exceptions are easier to use (Item 71).
You have two choices when designing a class for inheritance (Item 19), but
whichever one you choose, the class should not implement Cloneable. You may
choose to mimic the behavior of Object by implementing a properly functioning
protected clone method that is declared to throw CloneNotSupportedException.
This gives subclasses the freedom to implement Cloneable or not, just as if they
extended Object directly. Alternatively, you may choose not to implement a
working clone method, and to prevent subclasses from implementing one, by
providing the following degenerate clone implementation:
// clone method for extendable class not supporting Cloneable
@Override
protected final Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
throw new CloneNotSupportedException();
}
There is one more detail that bears noting. If you write a thread-safe class that
implements Cloneable, remember that its clone method must be properly syn-
chronized, just like any other method (Item 78). Object’s clone method is not
synchronized, so even if its implementation is otherwise satisfactory, you may
have to write a synchronized clone method that returns super.clone().
To recap, all classes that implement Cloneable should override clone with a
public method whose return type is the class itself. This method should first call
super.clone, then fix any fields that need fixing. Typically, this means copying
any mutable objects that comprise the internal “deep structure” of the object and
replacing the clone’s references to these objects with references to their copies.