ITEM 20: PREFER INTERFACES TO ABSTRACT CLASSES
99
Item 20: Prefer interfaces to abstract classes
Java has two mechanisms to define a type that permits multiple implementations:
interfaces and abstract classes. Since the introduction of default methods for inter-
faces in Java 8 [JLS 9.4.3], both mechanisms allow you to provide implementa-
tions for some instance methods. A major difference is that to implement the type
defined by an abstract class, a class must be a subclass of the abstract class.
Because Java permits only single inheritance, this restriction on abstract classes
severely constrains their use as type definitions. Any class that defines all the
required methods and obeys the general contract is permitted to implement an
interface, regardless of where the class resides in the class hierarchy.
Existing classes can easily be retrofitted to implement a new interface. All
you have to do is to add the required methods, if they don’t yet exist, and to add an
implements clause to the class declaration. For example, many existing classes
were retrofitted to implement the Comparable, Iterable, and Autocloseable
interfaces when they were added to the platform. Existing classes cannot, in
general, be retrofitted to extend a new abstract class. If you want to have two
classes extend the same abstract class, you have to place it high up in the type
hierarchy where it is an ancestor of both classes. Unfortunately, this can cause
great collateral damage to the type hierarchy, forcing all descendants of the new
abstract class to subclass it, whether or not it is appropriate.
Interfaces are ideal for defining mixins. Loosely speaking, a mixin is a type
that a class can implement in addition to its “primary type,” to declare that it pro-
vides some optional behavior. For example, Comparable is a mixin interface that
allows a class to declare that its instances are ordered with respect to other mutu-
ally comparable objects. Such an interface is called a mixin because it allows the
optional functionality to be “mixed in” to the type’s primary functionality.
Abstract classes can’t be used to define mixins for the same reason that they can’t
be retrofitted onto existing classes: a class cannot have more than one parent, and
there is no reasonable place in the class hierarchy to insert a mixin.
Interfaces allow for the construction of nonhierarchical type frameworks.
Type hierarchies are great for organizing some things, but other things don’t fall
neatly into a rigid hierarchy. For example, suppose we have an interface represent-
ing a singer and another representing a songwriter:
public interface Singer {
AudioClip sing(Song s);
}