CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
298
Item 71: Avoid unnecessary use of checked exceptions
Many Java programmers dislike checked exceptions, but used properly, they can
improve APIs and programs. Unlike return codes and unchecked exceptions, they
force programmers to deal with problems, enhancing reliability. That said, overuse of
checked exceptions in APIs can make them far less pleasant to use. If a method throws
checked exceptions, the code that invokes it must handle them in one or more catch
blocks, or declare that it throws them and let them propagate outward. Either way, it
places a burden on the user of the API. The burden increased in Java 8, as methods
throwing checked exceptions can’t be used directly in streams (Items 45–48).
This burden may be justified if the exceptional condition cannot be prevented
by proper use of the API and the programmer using the API can take some useful
action once confronted with the exception. Unless both of these conditions are
met, an unchecked exception is appropriate. As a litmus test, ask yourself how the
programmer will handle the exception. Is this the best that can be done?
} catch (TheCheckedException e) {
throw new AssertionError(); // Can't happen!
}
Or this?
} catch (TheCheckedException e) {
e.printStackTrace();  
 // Oh well, we lose.
System.exit(1);
}
If the programmer can do no better, an unchecked exception is called for.
The additional burden on the programmer caused by a checked exception is
substantially higher if it is the sole checked exception thrown by a method. If there
are others, the method must already appear in a try block, and this exception
requires, at most, another catch block. If a method throws a single checked
exception, this exception is the sole reason the method must appear in a try block
and can’t be used directly in streams. Under these circumstances, it pays to ask
yourself if there is a way to avoid the checked exception.
The easiest way to eliminate a checked exception is to return an optional of
the desired result type (Item 55). Instead of throwing a checked exception, the
method simply returns an empty optional. The disadvantage of this technique is
that the method can’t return any additional information detailing its inability to
perform the desired computation. Exceptions, by contrast, have descriptive types,
and can export methods to provide additional information (Item 70).