PREFACE
xv
ued enthusiasm for the platform and helps make your use of the platform and its
new features more effective and enjoyable.
San Jose, California
April 2008
Preface to the First Edition
In 1996 I pulled up stakes and headed west to work for JavaSoft, as it was then
known, because it was clear that that was where the action was. In the intervening
five years I’ve served as Java platform libraries architect. I’ve designed, imple-
mented, and maintained many of the libraries and served as a consultant for many
others. Presiding over these libraries as the Java platform matured was a once-in-a-
lifetime opportunity. It is no exaggeration to say that I had the privilege to work with
some of the great software engineers of our generation. In the process, I learned a lot
about the Java programming language—what works, what doesn’t, and how to use
the language and its libraries to best effect.
This book is my attempt to share my experience with you so that you can imi-
tate my successes while avoiding my failures. I borrowed the format from Scott
Meyers’s Effective C++, which consists of fifty items, each conveying one spe-
cific rule for improving your programs and designs. I found the format to be sin-
gularly effective, and I hope you do too.
In many cases, I took the liberty of illustrating the items with real-world
examples from the Java platform libraries. When describing something that could
have been done better, I tried to pick on code that I wrote myself, but occasionally
I pick on something written by a colleague. I sincerely apologize if, despite my
best efforts, I’ve offended anyone. Negative examples are cited not to cast blame
but in the spirit of cooperation, so that all of us can benefit from the experience of
those who’ve gone before.
While this book is not targeted solely at developers of reusable components, it
is inevitably colored by my experience writing such components over the past two
decades. I naturally think in terms of exported APIs (Application Programming
Interfaces), and I encourage you to do likewise. Even if you aren’t developing
reusable components, thinking in these terms tends to improve the quality of the
software you write. Furthermore, it’s not uncommon to write a reusable compo-