ITEM 71: AVOID UNNECESSARY USE OF CHECKED EXCEPTIONS
299
You can also turn a checked exception into an unchecked exception by
breaking the method that throws the exception into two methods, the first of which
returns a boolean indicating whether the exception would be thrown. This API
refactoring transforms the calling sequence from this:
// Invocation with checked exception
try {
obj.action(args);
} catch (TheCheckedException e) {
... // Handle exceptional condition
}
into this:
// Invocation with state-testing method and unchecked exception
if (obj.actionPermitted(args)) {
obj.action(args);
} else {
... // Handle exceptional condition
}
This refactoring is not always appropriate, but where it is, it can make an API
more pleasant to use. While the latter calling sequence is no prettier than the
former, the refactored API is more flexible. If the programmer knows the call will
succeed, or is content to let the thread terminate if it fails, the refactoring also
allows this trivial calling sequence:
obj.action(args);
If you suspect that the trivial calling sequence will be the norm, then the API
refactoring may be appropriate. The resulting API is essentially the state-testing
method API in Item 69 and the same caveats apply: if an object is to be accessed
concurrently without external synchronization or it is subject to externally
induced state transitions, this refactoring is inappropriate because the object’s
state may change between the calls to actionPermitted and action. If a separate
actionPermitted method would duplicate the work of the action method, the
refactoring may be ruled out on performance grounds.
In summary, when used sparingly, checked exceptions can increase the
reliability of programs; when overused, they make APIs painful to use. If callers
won’t be able to recover from failures, throw unchecked exceptions. If recovery
may be possible and you want to force callers to handle exceptional conditions,
first consider returning an optional. Only if this would provide insufficient
information in the case of failure should you throw a checked exception.