CHAPTER 8
METHODS
254
Item 56: Write doc comments for all exposed API elements
If an API is to be usable, it must be documented. Traditionally, API documentation
was generated manually, and keeping it in sync with code was a chore. The Java
programming environment eases this task with the Javadoc utility. Javadoc
generates API documentation automatically from source code with specially
formatted documentation comments, more commonly known as doc comments.
While the doc comment conventions are not officially part of the language,
they constitute a de facto API that every Java programmer should know. These
conventions are described in the How to Write Doc Comments web page [Javadoc-
guide]. While this page has not been updated since Java 4 was released, it is still
an invaluable resource. One important doc tag was added in Java 9, {@index}; one
in Java 8, {@implSpec}; and two in Java 5, {@literal} and {@code}. These tags
are missing from the aforementioned web page, but are discussed in this item.
To document your API properly, you must precede every exported class,
interface, constructor, method, and field declaration with a doc comment. If a
class is serializable, you should also document its serialized form (Item 87). In the
absence of a doc comment, the best that Javadoc can do is to reproduce the decla-
ration as the sole documentation for the affected API element. It is frustrating and
error-prone to use an API with missing documentation comments. Public classes
should not use default constructors because there is no way to provide doc com-
ments for them. To write maintainable code, you should also write doc comments
for most unexported classes, interfaces, constructors, methods, and fields, though
these comments needn’t be as thorough as those for exported API elements.
The doc comment for a method should describe succinctly the contract
between the method and its client. With the exception of methods in classes
designed for inheritance (Item 19), the contract should say what the method does
rather than how it does its job. The doc comment should enumerate all of the
method’s preconditions, which are the things that have to be true in order for a
client to invoke it, and its postconditions, which are the things that will be true
after the invocation has completed successfully. Typically, preconditions are
described implicitly by the @throws tags for unchecked exceptions; each
unchecked exception corresponds to a precondition violation. Also, preconditions
can be specified along with the affected parameters in their @param tags.
In addition to preconditions and postconditions, methods should document
any side effects. A side effect is an observable change in the state of the system
that is not obviously required in order to achieve the postcondition. For example,
if a method starts a background thread, the documentation should make note of it.