CHAPTER 2
CREATING AND DESTROYING OBJECTS
6
constructor BigInteger(int, int, Random), which returns a BigInteger that is
probably prime, would have been better expressed as a static factory method
named BigInteger.probablePrime. (This method was added in Java 4.)
A class can have only a single constructor with a given signature. Program-
mers have been known to get around this restriction by providing two constructors
whose parameter lists differ only in the order of their parameter types. This is a
really bad idea. The user of such an API will never be able to remember which
constructor is which and will end up calling the wrong one by mistake. People
reading code that uses these constructors will not know what the code does
without referring to the class documentation.
Because they have names, static factory methods don’t share the restriction
discussed in the previous paragraph. In cases where a class seems to require
multiple constructors with the same signature, replace the constructors with static
factory methods and carefully chosen names to highlight their differences.
A second advantage of static factory methods is that, unlike constructors,
they are not required to create a new object each time they’re invoked. This
allows immutable classes (Item 17) to use preconstructed instances, or to cache
instances as they’re constructed, and dispense them repeatedly to avoid creating
unnecessary duplicate objects. The Boolean.valueOf(boolean) method illus-
trates this technique: it never creates an object. This technique is similar to the
Flyweight pattern [Gamma95]. It can greatly improve performance if equivalent
objects are requested often, especially if they are expensive to create.
The ability of static factory methods to return the same object from repeated
invocations allows classes to maintain strict control over what instances exist at
any time. Classes that do this are said to be instance-controlled. There are several
reasons to write instance-controlled classes. Instance control allows a class to guar-
antee that it is a singleton (Item 3) or noninstantiable (Item 4). Also, it allows an
immutable value class (Item 17) to make the guarantee that no two equal instances
exist: a.equals(b) if and only if a == b. This is the basis of the Flyweight pattern
[Gamma95]. Enum types (Item 34) provide this guarantee.
A third advantage of static factory methods is that, unlike constructors,
they can return an object of any subtype of their return type. This gives you
great flexibility in choosing the class of the returned object.
One application of this flexibility is that an API can return objects without
making their classes public. Hiding implementation classes in this fashion leads to
a very compact API. This technique lends itself to interface-based frameworks
(Item 20), where interfaces provide natural return types for static factory methods.