ITEM 51: DESIGN METHOD SIGNATURES CAREFULLY
237
A second technique for shortening long parameter lists is to create helper
classes to hold groups of parameters. Typically these helper classes are static
member classes (Item 24). This technique is recommended if a frequently occur-
ring sequence of parameters is seen to represent some distinct entity. For example,
suppose you are writing a class representing a card game, and you find yourself
constantly passing a sequence of two parameters representing a card’s rank and its
suit. Your API, as well as the internals of your class, would probably benefit if you
added a helper class to represent a card and replaced every occurrence of the
parameter sequence with a single parameter of the helper class.
A third technique that combines aspects of the first two is to adapt the Builder
pattern (Item 2) from object construction to method invocation. If you have a
method with many parameters, especially if some of them are optional, it can be
beneficial to define an object that represents all of the parameters and to allow the
client to make multiple “setter” calls on this object, each of which sets a single
parameter or a small, related group. Once the desired parameters have been set,
the client invokes the object’s “execute” method, which does any final validity
checks on the parameters and performs the actual computation.
For parameter types, favor interfaces over classes (Item 64). If there is an
appropriate interface to define a parameter, use it in favor of a class that
implements the interface. For example, there is no reason to ever write a method
that takes HashMap on input—use Map instead. This lets you pass in a HashMap, a
TreeMap, a ConcurrentHashMap, a submap of a TreeMap, or any Map implementa-
tion yet to be written. By using a class instead of an interface, you restrict your
client to a particular implementation and force an unnecessary and potentially
expensive copy operation if the input data happens to exist in some other form.
Prefer two-element enum types to boolean parameters, unless the meaning
of the boolean is clear from the method name. Enums make your code easier to
read and to write. Also, they make it easy to add more options later. For example,
you might have a Thermometer type with a static factory that takes this enum:
public enum TemperatureScale { FAHRENHEIT, CELSIUS }
Not only does Thermometer.newInstance(TemperatureScale.CELSIUS) make
a lot more sense than Thermometer.newInstance(true), but you can add KELVIN
to TemperatureScale in a future release without having to add a new static
factory to Thermometer. Also, you can refactor temperature-scale dependencies
into methods on the enum constants (Item 34). For example, each scale constant
could have a method that took a double value and converted it to Celsius.