CHAPTER 10
EXCEPTIONS
308
Item 76: Strive for failure atomicity
After an object throws an exception, it is generally desirable that the object still be in
a well-defined, usable state, even if the failure occurred in the midst of performing
an operation. This is especially true for checked exceptions, from which the caller is
expected to recover. Generally speaking, a failed method invocation should leave
the object in the state that it was in prior to the invocation. A method with this
property is said to be failure-atomic.
There are several ways to achieve this effect. The simplest is to design
immutable objects (Item 17). If an object is immutable, failure atomicity is free. If
an operation fails, it may prevent a new object from getting created, but it will
never leave an existing object in an inconsistent state, because the state of each
object is consistent when it is created and can’t be modified thereafter.
For methods that operate on mutable objects, the most common way to
achieve failure atomicity is to check parameters for validity before performing the
operation (Item 49). This causes most exceptions to get thrown before object
modification commences. For example, consider the Stack.pop method in Item 7: 
public Object pop() {
if (size == 0)
throw new EmptyStackException();
Object result = elements[--size];
elements[size] = null; // Eliminate obsolete reference
return result;
}
If the initial size check were eliminated, the method would still throw an
exception when it attempted to pop an element from an empty stack. It would,
however, leave the size field in an inconsistent (negative) state, causing any future
method invocations on the object to fail. Additionally, the ArrayIndexOutOf-
BoundsException thrown by the pop method would be inappropriate to the
abstraction (Item 73).
A closely related approach to achieving failure atomicity is to order the com-
putation so that any part that may fail takes place before any part that modifies the
object. This approach is a natural extension of the previous one when arguments
cannot be checked without performing a part of the computation. For example,
consider the case of TreeMap, whose elements are sorted according to some order-
ing. In order to add an element to a TreeMap, the element must be of a type that
can be compared using the TreeMap’s ordering. Attempting to add an incorrectly