ITEM 37: USE ENUMMAP INSTEAD OF ORDINAL INDEXING
175
the transitions by source phase, and the second creates an EnumMap with mappings
from destination phase to transition. The merge function in the second collector
((x, y) -> y)) is unused; it is required only because we need to specify a map fac-
tory in order to get an EnumMap, and Collectors provides telescoping factories.
The previous edition of this book used explicit iteration to initialize the phase
transition map. The code was more verbose but arguably easier to understand.
Now suppose you want to add a new phase to the system: plasma, or ionized
gas. There are only two transitions associated with this phase: ionization, which
takes a gas to a plasma; and deionization, which takes a plasma to a gas. To update
the array-based program, you would have to add one new constant to Phase and
two to Phase.Transition, and replace the original nine-element array of arrays
with a new sixteen-element version. If you add too many or too few elements to
the array or place an element out of order, you are out of luck: the program will
compile, but it will fail at runtime. To update the EnumMap-based version, all you
have to do is add PLASMA to the list of phases, and IONIZE(GAS, PLASMA) and
DEIONIZE(PLASMA, GAS) to the list of phase transitions:
// Adding a new phase using the nested EnumMap implementation
public enum Phase {
SOLID, LIQUID, GAS, PLASMA;
public enum Transition {
MELT(SOLID, LIQUID), FREEZE(LIQUID, SOLID),
BOIL(LIQUID, GAS),
CONDENSE(GAS, LIQUID),
SUBLIME(SOLID, GAS), DEPOSIT(GAS, SOLID),
IONIZE(GAS, PLASMA), DEIONIZE(PLASMA, GAS);
... // Remainder unchanged
}
}
The program takes care of everything else and leaves you virtually no opportunity
for error. Internally, the map of maps is implemented with an array of arrays, so you
pay little in space or time cost for the added clarity, safety, and ease of maintenance.
In the interest of brevity, the above examples use null to indicate the absence
of a state change (wherein to and from are identical). This is not good practice
and is likely to result in a NullPointerException at runtime. Designing a clean,
elegant solution to this problem is surprisingly tricky, and the resulting programs
are sufficiently long that they would detract from the primary material in this item.
In summary, it is rarely appropriate to use ordinals to index into arrays:
use EnumMap instead. If the relationship you are representing is multidimensional,
use EnumMap<..., EnumMap<...>>. This is a special case of the general principle
that application programmers should rarely, if ever, use Enum.ordinal (Item 35).