CHAPTER 8
METHODS
230
in which the validity check would be expensive or impractical and the check is
performed implicitly in the process of doing the computation. For example,
consider a method that sorts a list of objects, such as Collections.sort(List).
All of the objects in the list must be mutually comparable. In the process of
sorting the list, every object in the list will be compared to some other object in the
list. If the objects aren’t mutually comparable, one of these comparisons will
throw a ClassCastException, which is exactly what the sort method should do.
Therefore, there would be little point in checking ahead of time that the elements
in the list were mutually comparable. Note, however, that indiscriminate reliance
on implicit validity checks can result in the loss of failure atomicity (Item 76).
Occasionally, a computation implicitly performs a required validity check but
throws the wrong exception if the check fails. In other words, the exception that
the computation would naturally throw as the result of an invalid parameter value
doesn’t match the exception that the method is documented to throw. Under these
circumstances, you should use the exception translation idiom, described in
Item 73, to translate the natural exception into the correct one.
Do not infer from this item that arbitrary restrictions on parameters are a good
thing. On the contrary, you should design methods to be as general as it is
practical to make them. The fewer restrictions that you place on parameters, the
better, assuming the method can do something reasonable with all of the
parameter values that it accepts. Often, however, some restrictions are intrinsic to
the abstraction being implemented.
To summarize, each time you write a method or constructor, you should think
about what restrictions exist on its parameters. You should document these
restrictions and enforce them with explicit checks at the beginning of the method
body. It is important to get into the habit of doing this. The modest work that it
entails will be paid back with interest the first time a validity check fails.