CHAPTER 8
METHODS
260
One caveat should be added concerning documentation comments. While it is
necessary to provide documentation comments for all exported API elements, it is
not always sufficient. For complex APIs consisting of multiple interrelated
classes, it is often necessary to supplement the documentation comments with an
external document describing the overall architecture of the API. If such a
document exists, the relevant class or package documentation comments should
include a link to it.
Javadoc automatically checks for adherence to many of the recommendations
in this item. In Java 7, the command line switch -Xdoclint was required to get
this behavior. In Java 8 and 9, checking is enabled by default. IDE plug-ins such as
checkstyle go further in checking for adherence to these recommendations
[Burn01]. You can also reduce the likelihood of errors in doc comments by
running the HTML files generated by Javadoc through an HTML validity checker.
This will detect many incorrect uses of HTML tags. Several such checkers are
available for download, and you can validate HTML on the web using the W3C
markup validation service [W3C-validator]. When validating generated HTML,
keep in mind that as of Java 9, Javadoc is capable of generating HTML5 as well as
HTML 4.01, though it still generates HTML 4.01 by default. Use the -html5
command line switch if you want Javadoc to generate HTML5.
The conventions described in this item cover the basics. Though it is fifteen
years old at the time of this writing, the definitive guide to writing doc comments
is still How to Write Doc Comments [Javadoc-guide].
If you adhere to the guidelines in this item, the generated documentation
should provide a clear description of your API. The only way to know for sure,
however, is to read the web pages generated by the Javadoc utility. It is worth
doing this for every API that will be used by others. Just as testing a program
almost inevitably results in some changes to the code, reading the documentation
generally results in at least a few minor changes to the doc comments.
To summarize, documentation comments are the best, most effective way to
document your API. Their use should be considered mandatory for all exported
API elements. Adopt a consistent style that adheres to standard conventions.
Remember that arbitrary HTML is permissible in documentation comments and
that HTML metacharacters must be escaped.