ITEM 86: IMPLEMENT SERIALIZABLE WITH GREAT CAUTION
343
Item 86: Implement Serializable with great caution
Allowing a class’s instances to be serialized can be as simple as adding the words
implements Serializable to its declaration. Because this is so easy to do, there
was a common misconception that serialization requires little effort on the part of
the programmer. The truth is far more complex. While the immediate cost to make
a class serializable can be negligible, the long-term costs are often substantial.
A major cost of implementing Serializable is that it decreases the
flexibility to change a class’s implementation once it has been released. When
a class implements Serializable, its byte-stream encoding (or serialized form)
becomes part of its exported API. Once you distribute a class widely, you are
generally required to support the serialized form forever, just as you are required
to support all other parts of the exported API. If you do not make the effort to
design a custom serialized form but merely accept the default, the serialized form
will forever be tied to the class’s original internal representation. In other words, if
you accept the default serialized form, the class’s private and package-private
instance fields become part of its exported API, and the practice of minimizing
access to fields (Item 15) loses its effectiveness as a tool for information hiding.
If you accept the default serialized form and later change a class’s internal
representation, an incompatible change in the serialized form will result. Clients
attempting to serialize an instance using an old version of the class and deserialize
it using the new one (or vice versa) will experience program failures. It is possible
to change the internal representation while maintaining the original serialized form
(using ObjectOutputStream.putFields and ObjectInputStream.readFields),
but it can be difficult and leaves visible warts in the source code. If you opt to make
a class serializable, you should carefully design a high-quality serialized form that
you’re willing to live with for the long haul (Items 87, 90). Doing so will add to the
initial cost of development, but it’s worth the effort. Even a well-designed
serialized form places constraints on the evolution of a class; an ill-designed
serialized form can be crippling.
A simple example of the constraints on evolution imposed by serializability
concerns stream unique identifiers, more commonly known as serial version
UIDs. Every serializable class has a unique identification number associated with
it. If you do not specify this number by declaring a static final long field named
serialVersionUID, the system automatically generates it at runtime by applying
a cryptographic hash function (SHA-1) to the structure of the class. This value is
affected by the names of the class, the interfaces it implements, and most of its
members, including synthetic members generated by the compiler. If you change