CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
276
Item 62: Avoid strings where other types are more appropriate
Strings are designed to represent text, and they do a fine job of it. Because strings
are so common and so well supported by the language, there is a natural tendency
to use strings for purposes other than those for which they were designed. This
item discusses a few things that you shouldn’t do with strings.
Strings are poor substitutes for other value types. When a piece of data
comes into a program from a file, from the network, or from keyboard input, it is
often in string form. There is a natural tendency to leave it that way, but this ten-
dency is justified only if the data really is textual in nature. If it’s numeric, it
should be translated into the appropriate numeric type, such as int, float, or
BigInteger. If it’s the answer to a yes-or-no question, it should be translated into
an appropriate enum type or a boolean. More generally, if there’s an appropriate
value type, whether primitive or object reference, you should use it; if there isn’t,
you should write one. While this advice may seem obvious, it is often violated.
Strings are poor substitutes for enum types. As discussed in Item 34,
enums make far better enumerated type constants than strings.
Strings are poor substitutes for aggregate types. If an entity has multiple
components, it is usually a bad idea to represent it as a single string. For example,
here’s a line of code that comes from a real system—identifier names have been
changed to protect the guilty:
// Inappropriate use of string as aggregate type
String compoundKey = className + "#" + i.next();
This approach has many disadvantages. If the character used to separate fields
occurs in one of the fields, chaos may result. To access individual fields, you have
to parse the string, which is slow, tedious, and error-prone. You can’t provide
equals, toString, or compareTo methods but are forced to accept the behavior
that String provides. A better approach is simply to write a class to represent the
aggregate, often a private static member class (Item 24).
Strings are poor substitutes for capabilities. Occasionally, strings are used
to grant access to some functionality. For example, consider the design of a
thread-local variable facility. Such a facility provides variables for which each
thread has its own value. The Java libraries have had a thread-local variable facil-
ity since release 1.2, but prior to that, programmers had to roll their own. When
confronted with the task of designing such a facility many years ago, several