ITEM 13: OVERRIDE CLONE JUDICIOUSLY
61
its size field, but its elements field will refer to the same array as the original
Stack instance. Modifying the original will destroy the invariants in the clone and
vice versa. You will quickly find that your program produces nonsensical results
or throws a NullPointerException. 
This situation could never occur as a result of calling the sole constructor in
the Stack class. In effect, the clone method functions as a constructor; you
must ensure that it does no harm to the original object and that it properly
establishes invariants on the clone. In order for the clone method on Stack to
work properly, it must copy the internals of the stack. The easiest way to do this is
to call clone recursively on the elements array:
// Clone method for class with references to mutable state
@Override public Stack clone() {
try {
Stack result = (Stack) super.clone();
result.elements = elements.clone();
return result;
} catch (CloneNotSupportedException e) {
throw new AssertionError();
}
}
Note that we do not have to cast the result of elements.clone to Object[].
Calling clone on an array returns an array whose runtime and compile-time types
are identical to those of the array being cloned. This is the preferred idiom to
duplicate an array. In fact, arrays are the sole compelling use of the clone facility.
Note also that the earlier solution would not work if the elements field were
final because clone would be prohibited from assigning a new value to the field.
This is a fundamental problem: like serialization, the Cloneable architecture is
incompatible with normal use of final fields referring to mutable objects,
except in cases where the mutable objects may be safely shared between an object
and its clone. In order to make a class cloneable, it may be necessary to remove
final modifiers from some fields.
It is not always sufficient merely to call clone recursively. For example,
suppose you are writing a clone method for a hash table whose internals consist
of an array of buckets, each of which references the first entry in a linked list of
key-value pairs. For performance, the class implements its own lightweight singly
linked list instead of using java.util.LinkedList internally:
public class HashTable implements Cloneable {
private Entry[] buckets = ...;