CHAPTER 11
CONCURRENCY
330
Item 82: Document thread safety
How a class behaves when its methods are used concurrently is an important part
of its contract with its clients. If you fail to document this aspect of a class’s
behavior, its users will be forced to make assumptions. If these assumptions are
wrong, the resulting program may perform insufficient synchronization (Item 78)
or excessive synchronization (Item 79). In either case, serious errors may result.
You may hear it said that you can tell if a method is thread-safe by looking for
the synchronized modifier in its documentation. This is wrong on several counts.
In normal operation, Javadoc does not include the synchronized modifier in its
output, and with good reason. The presence of the synchronized modifier in a
method declaration is an implementation detail, not a part of its API. It does
not reliably indicate that a method is thread-safe.
Moreover, the claim that the presence of the synchronized modifier is suffi-
cient to document thread safety embodies the misconception that thread safety is
an all-or-nothing property. In fact, there are several levels of thread safety. To
enable safe concurrent use, a class must clearly document what level of
thread safety it supports. The following list summarizes levels of thread safety.
It is not exhaustive but covers the common cases:
• Immutable—Instances of this class appear constant. No external synchroniza-
tion is necessary. Examples include String, Long, and BigInteger (Item 17).
• Unconditionally thread-safe—Instances of this class are mutable, but the
class has sufficient internal synchronization that its instances can be used
concurrently without the need for any external synchronization. Examples
include AtomicLong and ConcurrentHashMap.
• Conditionally thread-safe—Like unconditionally thread-safe, except that
some methods require external synchronization for safe concurrent use.
Examples include the collections returned by the Collections.synchronized
wrappers, whose iterators require external synchronization.
• Not thread-safe—Instances of this class are mutable. To use them concurrent-
ly, clients must surround each method invocation (or invocation sequence)
with external synchronization of the clients’ choosing. Examples include the
general-purpose collection implementations, such as ArrayList and HashMap.
• Thread-hostile—This class is unsafe for concurrent use even if every method
invocation is surrounded by external synchronization. Thread hostility usually
results from modifying static data without synchronization. No one writes a