ITEM 19: DESIGN AND DOCUMENT FOR INHERITANCE OR ELSE PROHIBIT IT
95
So how do you decide what protected members to expose when you design a
class for inheritance? Unfortunately, there is no magic bullet. The best you can do
is to think hard, take your best guess, and then test it by writing subclasses. You
should expose as few protected members as possible because each one represents
a commitment to an implementation detail. On the other hand, you must not
expose too few because a missing protected member can render a class practically
unusable for inheritance.
The only way to test a class designed for inheritance is to write subclasses.
If you omit a crucial protected member, trying to write a subclass will make the
omission painfully obvious. Conversely, if several subclasses are written and none
uses a protected member, you should probably make it private. Experience shows
that three subclasses are usually sufficient to test an extendable class. One or more
of these subclasses should be written by someone other than the superclass author.
When you design for inheritance a class that is likely to achieve wide use,
realize that you are committing forever to the self-use patterns that you document
and to the implementation decisions implicit in its protected methods and fields.
These commitments can make it difficult or impossible to improve the perfor-
mance or functionality of the class in a subsequent release. Therefore, you must
test your class by writing subclasses before you release it. 
Also, note that the special documentation required for inheritance clutters up
normal documentation, which is designed for programmers who create instances
of your class and invoke methods on them. As of this writing, there is little in the
way of tools to separate ordinary API documentation from information of interest
only to programmers implementing subclasses.
There are a few more restrictions that a class must obey to allow inheritance.
Constructors must not invoke overridable methods, directly or indirectly. If
you violate this rule, program failure will result. The superclass constructor runs
before the subclass constructor, so the overriding method in the subclass will get
invoked before the subclass constructor has run. If the overriding method depends
on any initialization performed by the subclass constructor, the method will not
behave as expected. To make this concrete, here’s a class that violates this rule:
public class Super {
// Broken - constructor invokes an overridable method
public Super() {
overrideMe();
}
public void overrideMe() {
}
}