CHAPTER 3
METHODS COMMON TO ALL OBJECTS
58
Item 13: Override clone judiciously
The Cloneable interface was intended as a mixin interface (Item 20) for classes to
advertise that they permit cloning. Unfortunately, it fails to serve this purpose. Its
primary flaw is that it lacks a clone method, and Object’s clone method is pro-
tected. You cannot, without resorting to reflection (Item 65), invoke clone on an
object merely because it implements Cloneable. Even a reflective invocation may
fail, because there is no guarantee that the object has an accessible clone method.
Despite this flaw and many others, the facility is in reasonably wide use, so it pays
to understand it. This item tells you how to implement a well-behaved clone
method, discusses when it is appropriate to do so, and presents alternatives.
So what does Cloneable do, given that it contains no methods? It determines
the behavior of Object’s protected clone implementation: if a class implements
Cloneable, Object’s clone method returns a field-by-field copy of the object;
otherwise it throws CloneNotSupportedException. This is a highly atypical use
of interfaces and not one to be emulated. Normally, implementing an interface
says something about what a class can do for its clients. In this case, it modifies
the behavior of a protected method on a superclass.
Though the specification doesn’t say it, in practice, a class implementing
Cloneable is expected to provide a properly functioning public clone method.
In order to achieve this, the class and all of its superclasses must obey a complex,
unenforceable, thinly documented protocol. The resulting mechanism is fragile,
dangerous, and extralinguistic: it creates objects without calling a constructor.
The general contract for the clone method is weak. Here it is, copied from the
Object specification :
Creates and returns a copy of this object. The precise meaning of “copy” may
depend on the class of the object. The general intent is that, for any object x,
the expression
x.clone() != x
will be true, and the expression
x.clone().getClass() == x.getClass()
will be true, but these are not absolute requirements. While it is typically the
case that
x.clone().equals(x)
will be true, this is not an absolute requirement.