ITEM 13: OVERRIDE CLONE JUDICIOUSLY
65
While these internal copies can usually be made by calling clone recursively, this
is not always the best approach. If the class contains only primitive fields or refer-
ences to immutable objects, then it is likely the case that no fields need to be fixed.
There are exceptions to this rule. For example, a field representing a serial number
or other unique ID will need to be fixed even if it is primitive or immutable.
Is all this complexity really necessary? Rarely. If you extend a class that
already implements Cloneable, you have little choice but to implement a well-
behaved clone method. Otherwise, you are usually better off providing an
alternative means of object copying. A better approach to object copying is to
provide a copy constructor or copy factory. A copy constructor is simply a
constructor that takes a single argument whose type is the class containing the
constructor, for example,
// Copy constructor
public Yum(Yum yum) { ... };
A copy factory is the static factory (Item 1) analogue of a copy constructor:
// Copy factory
public static Yum newInstance(Yum yum) { ... };
The copy constructor approach and its static factory variant have many
advantages over Cloneable/clone: they don’t rely on a risk-prone extralinguistic
object creation mechanism; they don’t demand unenforceable adherence to thinly
documented conventions; they don’t conflict with the proper use of final fields;
they don’t throw unnecessary checked exceptions; and they don’t require casts.
Furthermore, a copy constructor or factory can take an argument whose type
is an interface implemented by the class. For example, by convention all general-
purpose collection implementations provide a constructor whose argument is of
type Collection or Map. Interface-based copy constructors and factories, more
properly known as conversion constructors and conversion factories, allow the
client to choose the implementation type of the copy rather than forcing the client
to accept the implementation type of the original. For example, suppose you have
a HashSet, s, and you want to copy it as a TreeSet. The clone method can’t offer
this functionality, but it’s easy with a conversion constructor: new TreeSet<>(s).
Given all the problems associated with Cloneable, new interfaces should not
extend it, and new extendable classes should not implement it. While it’s less
harmful for final classes to implement Cloneable, this should be viewed as a per-
formance optimization, reserved for the rare cases where it is justified (Item 67).
As a rule, copy functionality is best provided by constructors or factories. A nota-
ble exception to this rule is arrays, which are best copied with the clone method.