ITEM 83: USE LAZY INITIALIZATION JUDICIOUSLY
333
Item 83: Use lazy initialization judiciously
Lazy initialization is the act of delaying the initialization of a field until its value is
needed. If the value is never needed, the field is never initialized. This technique is
applicable to both static and instance fields. While lazy initialization is primarily
an optimization, it can also be used to break harmful circularities in class and
instance initialization [Bloch05, Puzzle 51].
As is the case for most optimizations, the best advice for lazy initialization is
“don’t do it unless you need to” (Item 67). Lazy initialization is a double-edged
sword. It decreases the cost of initializing a class or creating an instance, at the
expense of increasing the cost of accessing the lazily initialized field. Depending
on what fraction of these fields eventually require initialization, how expensive it
is to initialize them, and how often each one is accessed once initialized, lazy
initialization can (like many “optimizations”) actually harm performance.
That said, lazy initialization has its uses. If a field is accessed only on a
fraction of the instances of a class and it is costly to initialize the field, then lazy
initialization may be worthwhile. The only way to know for sure is to measure the
performance of the class with and without lazy initialization. 
In the presence of multiple threads, lazy initialization is tricky. If two or more
threads share a lazily initialized field, it is critical that some form of synchroniza-
tion be employed, or severe bugs can result (Item 78). All of the initialization
techniques discussed in this item are thread-safe.
Under most circumstances, normal initialization is preferable to lazy ini-
tialization. Here is a typical declaration for a normally initialized instance field.
Note the use of the final modifier (Item 17):
// Normal initialization of an instance field
private final FieldType field = computeFieldValue();
If you use lazy initialization to break an initialization circularity, use a
synchronized accessor because it is the simplest, clearest alternative:
// Lazy initialization of instance field - synchronized accessor
private FieldType field;
private synchronized FieldType getField() {
if (field == null)
field = computeFieldValue();
return field;
}