ITEM 10: OBEY THE GENERAL CONTRACT WHEN OVERRIDING EQUALS
49
• Don’t substitute another type for Object in the equals declaration. It is not
uncommon for a programmer to write an equals method that looks like this
and then spend hours puzzling over why it doesn’t work properly:
// Broken - parameter type must be Object!
public boolean equals(MyClass o) {
...
}
The problem is that this method does not override Object.equals, whose
argument is of type Object, but overloads it instead (Item 52). It is
unacceptable to provide such a “strongly typed” equals method even in
addition to the normal one, because it can cause Override annotations in
subclasses to generate false positives and provide a false sense of security.
Consistent use of the Override annotation, as illustrated throughout this item,
will prevent you from making this mistake (Item 40). This equals method
won’t compile, and the error message will tell you exactly what is wrong:
// Still broken, but won’t compile
@Override public boolean equals(MyClass o) {
...
}
Writing and testing equals (and hashCode) methods is tedious, and the result-
ing code is mundane. An excellent alternative to writing and testing these methods
manually is to use Google’s open source AutoValue framework, which automati-
cally generates these methods for you, triggered by a single annotation on the
class . In most cases, the methods generated by AutoValue are essentially identical
to those you’d write yourself.
IDEs, too, have facilities to generate equals and hashCode methods, but the
resulting source code is more verbose and less readable than code that uses
AutoValue, does not track changes in the class automatically, and therefore
requires testing. That said, having IDEs generate equals (and hashCode) methods
is generally preferable to implementing them manually because IDEs do not make
careless mistakes, and humans do.
In summary, don’t override the equals method unless you have to: in many
cases, the implementation inherited from Object does exactly what you want. If
you do override equals, make sure to compare all of the class’s significant fields
and to compare them in a manner that preserves all five provisions of the equals
contract.