ITEM 10: OBEY THE GENERAL CONTRACT WHEN OVERRIDING EQUALS
45
extends java.util.Date and adds a nanoseconds field. The equals implementa-
tion for Timestamp does violate symmetry and can cause erratic behavior if
Timestamp and Date objects are used in the same collection or are otherwise inter-
mixed. The Timestamp class has a disclaimer cautioning programmers against
mixing dates and timestamps. While you won’t get into trouble as long as you
keep them separate, there’s nothing to prevent you from mixing them, and the
resulting errors can be hard to debug. This behavior of the Timestamp class was a
mistake and should not be emulated.
Note that you can add a value component to a subclass of an abstract class
without violating the equals contract. This is important for the sort of class hier-
archies that you get by following the advice in Item 23, “Prefer class hierarchies to
tagged classes.” For example, you could have an abstract class Shape with no
value components, a subclass Circle that adds a radius field, and a subclass
Rectangle that adds length and width fields. Problems of the sort shown earlier
won’t occur so long as it is impossible to create a superclass instance directly.
Consistency—The fourth requirement of the equals contract says that if two
objects are equal, they must remain equal for all time unless one (or both) of them
is modified. In other words, mutable objects can be equal to different objects at
different times while immutable objects can’t. When you write a class, think hard
about whether it should be immutable (Item 17). If you conclude that it should,
make sure that your equals method enforces the restriction that equal objects
remain equal and unequal objects remain unequal for all time.
Whether or not a class is immutable, do not write an equals method that
depends on unreliable resources. It’s extremely difficult to satisfy the consis-
tency requirement if you violate this prohibition. For example, java.net.URL’s
equals method relies on comparison of the IP addresses of the hosts associated
with the URLs. Translating a host name to an IP address can require network
access, and it isn’t guaranteed to yield the same results over time. This can cause
the URL equals method to violate the equals contract and has caused problems in
practice. The behavior of URL’s equals method was a big mistake and should not
be emulated. Unfortunately, it cannot be changed due to compatibility require-
ments. To avoid this sort of problem, equals methods should perform only deter-
ministic computations on memory-resident objects.
Non-nullity—The final requirement lacks an official name, so I have taken
the liberty of calling it “non-nullity.” It says that all objects must be unequal to
null. While it is hard to imagine accidentally returning true in response to the
invocation o.equals(null), it isn’t hard to imagine accidentally throwing a