CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
82
This class represents a complex number (a number with both real and imagi-
nary parts). In addition to the standard Object methods, it provides accessors for
the real and imaginary parts and provides the four basic arithmetic operations:
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Notice how the arithmetic oper-
ations create and return a new Complex instance rather than modifying this
instance. This pattern is known as the functional approach because methods return
the result of applying a function to their operand, without modifying it. Contrast it
to the procedural or imperative approach in which methods apply a procedure to
their operand, causing its state to change. Note that the method names are preposi-
tions (such as plus) rather than verbs (such as add). This emphasizes the fact that
methods don’t change the values of the objects. The BigInteger and BigDecimal
classes did not obey this naming convention, and it led to many usage errors.
The functional approach may appear unnatural if you’re not familiar with it,
but it enables immutability, which has many advantages. Immutable objects are
simple. An immutable object can be in exactly one state, the state in which it was
created. If you make sure that all constructors establish class invariants, then it is
guaranteed that these invariants will remain true for all time, with no further effort
on your part or on the part of the programmer who uses the class. Mutable objects,
on the other hand, can have arbitrarily complex state spaces. If the documentation
does not provide a precise description of the state transitions performed by muta-
tor methods, it can be difficult or impossible to use a mutable class reliably.
Immutable objects are inherently thread-safe; they require no synchroni-
zation. They cannot be corrupted by multiple threads accessing them concur-
rently. This is far and away the easiest approach to achieve thread safety. Since no
thread can ever observe any effect of another thread on an immutable object,
immutable objects can be shared freely. Immutable classes should therefore
encourage clients to reuse existing instances wherever possible. One easy way to
do this is to provide public static final constants for commonly used values. For
example, the Complex class might provide these constants:
public static final Complex ZERO = new Complex(0, 0);
public static final Complex ONE
= new Complex(1, 0);
public static final Complex I
= new Complex(0, 1);
This approach can be taken one step further. An immutable class can provide
static factories (Item 1) that cache frequently requested instances to avoid creating
new instances when existing ones would do. All the boxed primitive classes and
BigInteger do this. Using such static factories causes clients to share instances
instead of creating new ones, reducing memory footprint and garbage collection