CHAPTER 2
CREATING AND DESTROYING OBJECTS
24
For example, the keySet method of the Map interface returns a Set view of the
Map object, consisting of all the keys in the map. Naively, it would seem that every
call to keySet would have to create a new Set instance, but every call to keySet
on a given Map object may return the same Set instance. Although the returned Set
instance is typically mutable, all of the returned objects are functionally identical:
when one of the returned objects changes, so do all the others, because they’re all
backed by the same Map instance. While it is largely harmless to create multiple
instances of the keySet view object, it is unnecessary and has no benefits.
Another way to create unnecessary objects is autoboxing, which allows the
programmer to mix primitive and boxed primitive types, boxing and unboxing
automatically as needed. Autoboxing blurs but does not erase the distinction
between primitive and boxed primitive types. There are subtle semantic distinc-
tions and not-so-subtle performance differences (Item 61). Consider the following
method, which calculates the sum of all the positive int values. To do this, the
program has to use long arithmetic because an int is not big enough to hold the
sum of all the positive int values:
// Hideously slow! Can you spot the object creation?
private static long sum() {
Long sum = 0L;
for (long i = 0; i <= Integer.MAX_VALUE; i++)
sum += i;
return sum;
}
This program gets the right answer, but it is much slower than it should be,
due to a one-character typographical error. The variable sum is declared as a Long
instead of a long, which means that the program constructs about 231 unnecessary
Long instances (roughly one for each time the long i is added to the Long sum).
Changing the declaration of sum from Long to long reduces the runtime from 6.3
seconds to 0.59 seconds on my machine. The lesson is clear: prefer primitives to
boxed primitives, and watch out for unintentional autoboxing.
This item should not be misconstrued to imply that object creation is expen-
sive and should be avoided. On the contrary, the creation and reclamation of small
objects whose constructors do little explicit work is cheap, especially on modern
JVM implementations. Creating additional objects to enhance the clarity, simplic-
ity, or power of a program is generally a good thing. 
Conversely, avoiding object creation by maintaining your own object pool is a
bad idea unless the objects in the pool are extremely heavyweight. The classic