ITEM 32: COMBINE GENERICS AND VARARGS JUDICIOUSLY
147
answer is that methods with varargs parameters of generic or parameterized types
can be very useful in practice, so the language designers opted to live with this
inconsistency. In fact, the Java libraries export several such methods, including
Arrays.asList(T... a), Collections.addAll(Collection<? super T> c,
T... elements), and EnumSet.of(E first, E... rest). Unlike the dangerous
method shown earlier, these library methods are typesafe.
Prior to Java 7, there was nothing the author of a method with a generic
varargs parameter could do about the warnings at the call sites. This made these
APIs unpleasant to use. Users had to put up with the warnings or, preferably, to
eliminate them with @SuppressWarnings("unchecked") annotations at every
call site (Item 27). This was tedious, harmed readability, and hid warnings that
flagged real issues.
In Java 7, the SafeVarargs annotation was added to the platform, to allow the
author of a method with a generic varargs parameter to suppress client warnings
automatically. In essence, the SafeVarargs annotation constitutes a promise by
the author of a method that it is typesafe. In exchange for this promise, the com-
piler agrees not to warn the users of the method that calls may be unsafe.
It is critical that you do not annotate a method with @SafeVarargs unless it
actually is safe. So what does it take to ensure this? Recall that a generic array is
created when the method is invoked, to hold the varargs parameters. If the method
doesn’t store anything into the array (which would overwrite the parameters) and
doesn’t allow a reference to the array to escape (which would enable untrusted
code to access the array), then it’s safe. In other words, if the varargs parameter
array is used only to transmit a variable number of arguments from the caller to
the method—which is, after all, the purpose of varargs—then the method is safe.
It is worth noting that you can violate type safety without ever storing any-
thing in the varargs parameter array. Consider the following generic varargs
method, which returns an array containing its parameters. At first glance, it may
look like a handy little utility:
// UNSAFE - Exposes a reference to its generic parameter array!
static <T> T[] toArray(T... args) {
    return args;
}
This method simply returns its varargs parameter array. The method may not look
dangerous, but it is! The type of this array is determined by the compile-time types
of the arguments passed in to the method, and the compiler may not have enough
information to make an accurate determination. Because this method returns its
varargs parameter array, it can propagate heap pollution up the call stack.