CHAPTER 3
METHODS COMMON TO ALL OBJECTS
66
Item 14: Consider implementing Comparable
Unlike the other methods discussed in this chapter, the compareTo method is not
declared in Object. Rather, it is the sole method in the Comparable interface. It is
similar in character to Object’s equals method, except that it permits order com-
parisons in addition to simple equality comparisons, and it is generic. By imple-
menting Comparable, a class indicates that its instances have a natural ordering.
Sorting an array of objects that implement Comparable is as simple as this:
Arrays.sort(a);
It is similarly easy to search, compute extreme values, and maintain automati-
cally sorted collections of Comparable objects. For example, the following pro-
gram, which relies on the fact that String implements Comparable, prints an
alphabetized list of its command-line arguments with duplicates eliminated:
public class WordList {
public static void main(String[] args) {
Set<String> s = new TreeSet<>();
Collections.addAll(s, args);
System.out.println(s);
}
}
By implementing Comparable, you allow your class to interoperate with all of
the many generic algorithms and collection implementations that depend on this
interface. You gain a tremendous amount of power for a small amount of effort.
Virtually all of the value classes in the Java platform libraries, as well as all enum
types (Item 34), implement Comparable. If you are writing a value class with an
obvious natural ordering, such as alphabetical order, numerical order, or chrono-
logical order, you should implement the Comparable interface:
public interface Comparable<T> {
int compareTo(T t);
}
The general contract of the compareTo method is similar to that of equals:
Compares this object with the specified object for order. Returns a negative
integer, zero, or a positive integer as this object is less than, equal to, or greater
than the specified object. Throws ClassCastException if the specified
object’s type prevents it from being compared to this object.