CHAPTER 12
SERIALIZATION
344
any of these things, for example, by adding a convenience method, the generated
serial version UID changes. If you fail to declare a serial version UID, compatibil-
ity will be broken, resulting in an InvalidClassException at runtime.
A second cost of implementing Serializable is that it increases the likeli-
hood of bugs and security holes (Item 85). Normally, objects are created with
constructors; serialization is an extralinguistic mechanism for creating objects.
Whether you accept the default behavior or override it, deserialization is a “hidden
constructor” with all of the same issues as other constructors. Because there is no
explicit constructor associated with deserialization, it is easy to forget that you
must ensure that it guarantees all of the invariants established by the constructors
and that it does not allow an attacker to gain access to the internals of the object
under construction. Relying on the default deserialization mechanism can easily
leave objects open to invariant corruption and illegal access (Item 88).
A third cost of implementing Serializable is that it increases the testing
burden associated with releasing a new version of a class. When a serializable
class is revised, it is important to check that it is possible to serialize an instance in
the new release and deserialize it in old releases, and vice versa. The amount of
testing required is thus proportional to the product of the number of serializable
classes and the number of releases, which can be large. You must ensure both that
the serialization-deserialization process succeeds and that it results in a faithful
replica of the original object. The need for testing is reduced if a custom serialized
form is carefully designed when the class is first written (Items 87, 90).
Implementing Serializable is not a decision to be undertaken lightly. It
is essential if a class is to participate in a framework that relies on Java serializa-
tion for object transmission or persistence. Also, it greatly eases the use of a class
as a component in another class that must implement Serializable. There are,
however, many costs associated with implementing Serializable. Each time you
design a class, weigh the costs against the benefits. Historically, value classes such
as BigInteger and Instant implemented Serializable, and collection classes
did too. Classes representing active entities, such as thread pools, should rarely
implement Serializable.
Classes designed for inheritance (Item 19) should rarely implement
Serializable, and interfaces should rarely extend it. Violating this rule places
a substantial burden on anyone who extends the class or implements the interface.
There are times when it is appropriate to violate the rule. For example, if a class or
interface exists primarily to participate in a framework that requires all
participants to implement Serializable, then it may make sense for the class or
interface to implement or extend Serializable.