CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
102
The beauty of skeletal implementation classes is that they provide all of the
implementation assistance of abstract classes without imposing the severe con-
straints that abstract classes impose when they serve as type definitions. For most
implementors of an interface with a skeletal implementation class, extending this
class is the obvious choice, but it is strictly optional. If a class cannot be made to
extend the skeletal implementation, the class can always implement the interface
directly. The class still benefits from any default methods present on the interface
itself. Furthermore, the skeletal implementation can still aid the implementor’s
task. The class implementing the interface can forward invocations of interface
methods to a contained instance of a private inner class that extends the skeletal
implementation. This technique, known as simulated multiple inheritance, is
closely related to the wrapper class idiom discussed in Item 18. It provides many
of the benefits of multiple inheritance, while avoiding the pitfalls.
Writing a skeletal implementation is a relatively simple, if somewhat tedious,
process. First, study the interface and decide which methods are the primitives in
terms of which the others can be implemented. These primitives will be the
abstract methods in your skeletal implementation. Next, provide default methods
in the interface for all of the methods that can be implemented directly atop the
primitives, but recall that you may not provide default methods for Object
methods such as equals and hashCode. If the primitives and default methods
cover the interface, you’re done, and have no need for a skeletal implementation
class. Otherwise, write a class declared to implement the interface, with
implementations of all of the remaining interface methods. The class may contain
any nonpublic fields ands methods appropriate to the task.
As a simple example, consider the Map.Entry interface. The obvious primi-
tives are getKey, getValue, and (optionally) setValue. The interface specifies the
behavior of equals and hashCode, and there is an obvious implementation of
toString in terms of the primitives. Since you are not allowed to provide default
implementations for the Object methods, all implementations are placed in the
skeletal implementation class:
// Skeletal implementation class
public abstract class AbstractMapEntry<K,V>
implements Map.Entry<K,V> {
// Entries in a modifiable map must override this method
@Override public V setValue(V value) {
throw new UnsupportedOperationException();
}