xvii
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments for the Third Edition
I thank the readers of the first two editions of this book for giving it such a kind and
enthusiastic reception, for taking its ideas to heart, and for letting me know what a
positive influence it had on them and their work. I thank the many professors who
used the book in their courses, and the many engineering teams that adopted it.
I thank the whole team at Addison-Wesley and Pearson for their kindness, pro-
fessionalism, patience, and grace under extreme pressure. Through it all, my editor
Greg Doench remained unflappable: a fine editor and a perfect gentleman. I’m
afraid his hair may have turned a bit gray as a result of this project, and I humbly
apologize. My project manager, Julie Nahil, and my project editor, Dana Wilson,
were all I could hope for: diligent, prompt, organized, and friendly. My copy editor,
Kim Wimpsett, was meticulous and tasteful.
I have yet again been blessed with the best team of reviewers imaginable, and
I give my sincerest thanks to each of them. The core team, who reviewed most
every chapter, consisted of Cindy Bloch, Brian Kernighan, Kevin Bourrillion, Joe
Bowbeer, William Chargin, Joe Darcy, Brian Goetz, Tim Halloran, Stuart Marks,
Tim Peierls, and Yoshiki Shibata, Other reviewers included Marcus Biel, Dan
Bloch, Beth Bottos, Martin Buchholz, Michael Diamond, Charlie Garrod, Tom
Hawtin, Doug Lea, Aleksey Shipilëv, Lou Wasserman, and Peter Weinberger.
These reviewers made numerous suggestions that led to great improvements in
this book and saved me from many embarrassments.
I give special thanks to William Chargin, Doug Lea, and Tim Peierls, who
served as sounding boards for many of the ideas in this book. William, Doug, and
Tim were unfailingly generous with their time and knowledge.
Finally, I thank my wife, Cindy Bloch, for encouraging me to write, for read-
ing each item in raw form, for writing the index, for helping me with all of the
things that invariably come up when you take on a big project, and for putting up
with me while I wrote.