ITEM 55: RETURN OPTIONALS JUDICIOUSLY
253
An Optional is an object that has to be allocated and initialized, and reading the
value out of the optional requires an extra indirection. This makes optionals
inappropriate for use in some performance-critical situations. Whether a particular
method falls into this category can only be determined by careful measurement
(Item 67).
Returning an optional that contains a boxed primitive type is prohibitively
expensive compared to returning a primitive type because the optional has two
levels of boxing instead of zero. Therefore, the library designers saw fit to provide
analogues of Optional<T> for the primitive types int, long, and double. These
optional types are OptionalInt, OptionalLong, and OptionalDouble. They
contain most, but not all, of the methods on Optional<T>. Therefore, you should
never return an optional of a boxed primitive type, with the possible exception
of the “minor primitive types,” Boolean, Byte, Character, Short, and Float.
Thus far, we have discussed returning optionals and processing them after they
are returned. We have not discussed other possible uses, and that is because most
other uses of optionals are suspect. For example, you should never use optionals as
map values. If you do, you have two ways of expressing a key’s logical absence
from the map: either the key can be absent from the map, or it can be present and
map to an empty optional. This represents needless complexity with great
potential for confusion and errors. More generally, it is almost never appropriate
to use an optional as a key, value, or element in a collection or array.
This leaves a big question unanswered. Is it ever appropriate to store an
optional in an instance field? Often it’s a “bad smell”: it suggests that perhaps you
should have a subclass containing the optional fields. But sometimes it may be
justified. Consider the case of our NutritionFacts class in Item 2. A
NutritionFacts instance contains many fields that are not required. You can’t
have a subclass for every possible combination of these fields. Also, the fields
have primitive types, which make it awkward to express absence directly. The best
API for NutritionFacts would return an optional from the getter for each
optional field, so it makes good sense to simply store those optionals as fields in
the object.
In summary, if you find yourself writing a method that can’t always return a
value and you believe it is important that users of the method consider this
possibility every time they call it, then you should probably return an optional.
You should, however, be aware that there are real performance consequences
associated with returning optionals; for performance-critical methods, it may be
better to return a null or throw an exception. Finally, you should rarely use an
optional in any other capacity than as a return value.