ITEM 34: USE ENUMS INSTEAD OF INT CONSTANTS
161
by overriding the toString method. Here is the result of running our WeightTable
program (which doesn’t override toString) with the command line argument 185:
Weight on MERCURY is 69.912739
Weight on VENUS is 167.434436
Weight on EARTH is 185.000000
Weight on MARS is 70.226739
Weight on JUPITER is 467.990696
Weight on SATURN is 197.120111
Weight on URANUS is 167.398264
Weight on NEPTUNE is 210.208751
Until 2006, two years after enums were added to Java, Pluto was a planet. This
raises the question “what happens when you remove an element from an enum
type?” The answer is that any client program that doesn’t refer to the removed
element will continue to work fine. So, for example, our WeightTable program
would simply print a table with one fewer row. And what of a client program that
refers to the removed element (in this case, Planet.Pluto)? If you recompile the
client program, the compilation will fail with a helpful error message at the line
that refers to the erstwhile planet; if you fail to recompile the client, it will throw a
helpful exception from this line at runtime. This is the best behavior you could
hope for, far better than what you’d get with the int enum pattern.
Some behaviors associated with enum constants may need to be used only
from within the class or package in which the enum is defined. Such behaviors are
best implemented as private or package-private methods. Each constant then
carries with it a hidden collection of behaviors that allows the class or package
containing the enum to react appropriately when presented with the constant. Just
as with other classes, unless you have a compelling reason to expose an enum
method to its clients, declare it private or, if need be, package-private (Item 15).
If an enum is generally useful, it should be a top-level class; if its use is tied to
a specific top-level class, it should be a member class of that top-level class
(Item 24). For example, the java.math.RoundingMode enum represents a round-
ing mode for decimal fractions. These rounding modes are used by the BigDeci-
mal class, but they provide a useful abstraction that is not fundamentally tied to
BigDecimal. By making RoundingMode a top-level enum, the library designers
encourage any programmer who needs rounding modes to reuse this enum, lead-
ing to increased consistency across APIs.
The techniques demonstrated in the Planet example are sufficient for most
enum types, but sometimes you need more. There is different data associated with
each Planet constant, but sometimes you need to associate fundamentally differ-
ent behavior with each constant. For example, suppose you are writing an enum