CHAPTER 8
METHODS
246
one varargs parameter of this type. This solution corrects all the deficiencies of the
previous one:
// The right way to use varargs to pass one or more arguments
static int min(int firstArg, int... remainingArgs) {
int min = firstArg;
for (int arg : remainingArgs)
if (arg < min)
min = arg;
return min;
}
As you can see from this example, varargs are effective in circumstances
where you want a method with a variable number of arguments. Varargs were
designed for printf, which was added to the platform at the same time as varargs,
and for the core reflection facility (Item 65), which was retrofitted. Both printf
and reflection benefited enormously from varargs.
Exercise care when using varargs in performance-critical situations. Every
invocation of a varargs method causes an array allocation and initialization. If you
have determined empirically that you can’t afford this cost but you need the
flexibility of varargs, there is a pattern that lets you have your cake and eat it too.
Suppose you’ve determined that 95 percent of the calls to a method have three or
fewer parameters. Then declare five overloadings of the method, one each with
zero through three ordinary parameters, and a single varargs method for use when
the number of arguments exceeds three:
public void foo() { }
public void foo(int a1) { }
public void foo(int a1, int a2) { }
public void foo(int a1, int a2, int a3) { }
public void foo(int a1, int a2, int a3, int... rest) { }
Now you know that you’ll pay the cost of the array creation only in the 5 percent
of all invocations where the number of parameters exceeds three. Like most
performance optimizations, this technique usually isn’t appropriate, but when it is,
it’s a lifesaver.
The static factories for EnumSet use this technique to reduce the cost of creat-
ing enum sets to a minimum. This was appropriate because it was critical that
enum sets provide a performance-competitive replacement for bit fields (Item 36).
In summary, varargs are invaluable when you need to define methods with a
variable number of arguments. Precede the varargs parameter with any required
parameters, and be aware of the performance consequences of using varargs.