ITEM 11: ALWAYS OVERRIDE HASHCODE WHEN YOU OVERRIDE EQUALS
51
Fixing this problem is as simple as writing a proper hashCode method for
PhoneNumber. So what should a hashCode method look like? It’s trivial to write a
bad one. This one, for example, is always legal but should never be used:
// The worst possible legal hashCode implementation - never use!
@Override public int hashCode() { return 42; }
It’s legal because it ensures that equal objects have the same hash code. It’s
atrocious because it ensures that every object has the same hash code. Therefore,
every object hashes to the same bucket, and hash tables degenerate to linked lists.
Programs that should run in linear time instead run in quadratic time. For large
hash tables, this is the difference between working and not working.
A good hash function tends to produce unequal hash codes for unequal
instances. This is exactly what is meant by the third part of the hashCode contract.
Ideally, a hash function should distribute any reasonable collection of unequal
instances uniformly across all int values. Achieving this ideal can be difficult.
Luckily it’s not too hard to achieve a fair approximation. Here is a simple recipe:
1. Declare an int variable named result, and initialize it to the hash code c for
the first significant field in your object, as computed in step 2.a. (Recall from
Item 10 that a significant field is a field that affects equals comparisons.)
2. For every remaining significant field f in your object, do the following:
a. Compute an int hash code c for the field:
i.
If the field is of a primitive type, compute Type.hashCode(f), where
Type is the boxed primitive class corresponding to f’s type.
ii.
If the field is an object reference and this class’s equals method
compares the field by recursively invoking equals, recursively
invoke hashCode on the field. If a more complex comparison is
required, compute a “canonical representation” for this field and
invoke hashCode on the canonical representation. If the value of the
field is null, use 0 (or some other constant, but 0 is traditional).
iii. If the field is an array, treat it as if each significant element were a
separate field. That is, compute a hash code for each significant
element by applying these rules recursively, and combine the values
per step 2.b. If the array has no significant elements, use a constant,
preferably not 0. If all elements are significant, use Arrays.hashCode.
b. Combine the hash code c computed in step 2.a into result as follows:
        result = 31 * result + c;
3. Return result.