ITEM 34: USE ENUMS INSTEAD OF INT CONSTANTS
167
If switch statements on enums are not a good choice for implementing
constant-specific behavior on enums, what are they good for? Switches on enums
are good for augmenting enum types with constant-specific behavior. For
example, suppose the Operation enum is not under your control and you wish it
had an instance method to return the inverse of each operation. You could simulate
the effect with the following static method:
// Switch on an enum to simulate a missing method
public static Operation inverse(Operation op) {
switch(op) {
case PLUS:   return Operation.MINUS;
case MINUS:  return Operation.PLUS;
case TIMES:  return Operation.DIVIDE;
case DIVIDE: return Operation.TIMES;
default:
throw new AssertionError("Unknown op: " + op);
}
}
You should also use this technique on enum types that are under your control if a
method simply doesn’t belong in the enum type. The method may be required for
some use but is not generally useful enough to merit inclusion in the enum type.
Enums are, generally speaking, comparable in performance to int constants.
A minor performance disadvantage of enums is that there is a space and time cost
to load and initialize enum types, but it is unlikely to be noticeable in practice.
So when should you use enums? Use enums any time you need a set of con-
stants whose members are known at compile time. Of course, this includes
“natural enumerated types,” such as the planets, the days of the week, and the
chess pieces. But it also includes other sets for which you know all the possible
values at compile time, such as choices on a menu, operation codes, and command
line flags. It is not necessary that the set of constants in an enum type stay
fixed for all time. The enum feature was specifically designed to allow for binary
compatible evolution of enum types. 
In summary, the advantages of enum types over int constants are compelling.
Enums are more readable, safer, and more powerful. Many enums require no
explicit constructors or members, but others benefit from associating data with
each constant and providing methods whose behavior is affected by this data.
Fewer enums benefit from associating multiple behaviors with a single method. In
this relatively rare case, prefer constant-specific methods to enums that switch on
their own values. Consider the strategy enum pattern if some, but not all, enum
constants share common behaviors.