CHAPTER 3
METHODS COMMON TO ALL OBJECTS
38
• A superclass has already overridden equals, and the superclass behavior
is appropriate for this class. For example, most Set implementations inherit
their equals implementation from AbstractSet, List implementations from
AbstractList, and Map implementations from AbstractMap.
• The class is private or package-private, and you are certain that its equals
method will never be invoked. If you are extremely risk-averse, you can over-
ride the equals method to ensure that it isn’t invoked accidentally:
@Override public boolean equals(Object o) {
throw new AssertionError(); // Method is never called
}
So when is it appropriate to override equals? It is when a class has a notion of
logical equality that differs from mere object identity and a superclass has not
already overridden equals. This is generally the case for value classes. A value
class is simply a class that represents a value, such as Integer or String. A
programmer who compares references to value objects using the equals method
expects to find out whether they are logically equivalent, not whether they refer to
the same object. Not only is overriding the equals method necessary to satisfy
programmer expectations, it enables instances to serve as map keys or set
elements with predictable, desirable behavior.
One kind of value class that does not require the equals method to be overrid-
den is a class that uses instance control (Item 1) to ensure that at most one object
exists with each value. Enum types (Item 34) fall into this category. For these
classes, logical equality is the same as object identity, so Object’s equals method
functions as a logical equals method.
When you override the equals method, you must adhere to its general con-
tract. Here is the contract, from the specification for Object :
The equals method implements an equivalence relation. It has these properties:
• Reflexive: For any non-null reference value x, x.equals(x) must return true.
• Symmetric: For any non-null reference values x and y, x.equals(y) must re-
turn true if and only if y.equals(x) returns true.
• Transitive: For any non-null reference values x, y, z, if x.equals(y) returns
true and y.equals(z) returns true, then x.equals(z) must return true.
• Consistent: For any non-null reference values x and y, multiple invocations
of x.equals(y) must consistently return true or consistently return false,
provided no information used in equals comparisons is modified.
• For any non-null reference value x, x.equals(null) must return false.