CHAPTER 4
CLASSES AND INTERFACES
112
Item 24: Favor static member classes over nonstatic
A nested class is a class defined within another class. A nested class should exist
only to serve its enclosing class. If a nested class would be useful in some other
context, then it should be a top-level class. There are four kinds of nested classes:
static member classes, nonstatic member classes, anonymous classes, and local
classes. All but the first kind are known as inner classes. This item tells you when
to use which kind of nested class and why.
A static member class is the simplest kind of nested class. It is best thought of
as an ordinary class that happens to be declared inside another class and has
access to all of the enclosing class’s members, even those declared private. A
static member class is a static member of its enclosing class and obeys the same
accessibility rules as other static members. If it is declared private, it is accessible
only within the enclosing class, and so forth.
One common use of a static member class is as a public helper class, useful
only in conjunction with its outer class. For example, consider an enum describing
the operations supported by a calculator (Item 34). The Operation enum should
be a public static member class of the Calculator class. Clients of Calculator
could then refer to operations using names like Calculator.Operation.PLUS and
Calculator.Operation.MINUS.
Syntactically, the only difference between static and nonstatic member classes
is that static member classes have the modifier static in their declarations.
Despite the syntactic similarity, these two kinds of nested classes are very differ-
ent. Each instance of a nonstatic member class is implicitly associated with an
enclosing instance of its containing class. Within instance methods of a nonstatic
member class, you can invoke methods on the enclosing instance or obtain a refer-
ence to the enclosing instance using the qualified this construct [JLS, 15.8.4]. If an
instance of a nested class can exist in isolation from an instance of its enclosing
class, then the nested class must be a static member class: it is impossible to create
an instance of a nonstatic member class without an enclosing instance.
The association between a nonstatic member class instance and its enclosing
instance is established when the member class instance is created and cannot be
modified thereafter. Normally, the association is established automatically by
invoking a nonstatic member class constructor from within an instance method of
the enclosing class. It is possible, though rare, to establish the association
manually using the expression enclosingInstance.new MemberClass(args).
As you would expect, the association takes up space in the nonstatic member class
instance and adds time to its construction.