CHAPTER 5
GENERICS
144
ScheduledFuture instances; it is comparable to any Delayed instance, and that’s
enough to cause the original declaration to reject it. More generally, the wildcard
is required to support types that do not implement Comparable (or Comparator)
directly but extend a type that does.
There is one more wildcard-related topic that bears discussing. There is a
duality between type parameters and wildcards, and many methods can be
declared using one or the other. For example, here are two possible declarations
for a static method to swap two indexed items in a list. The first uses an
unbounded type parameter (Item 30) and the second an unbounded wildcard:
// Two possible declarations for the swap method
public static <E> void swap(List<E> list, int i, int j);
public static void swap(List<?> list, int i, int j);
Which of these two declarations is preferable, and why? In a public API, the
second is better because it’s simpler. You pass in a list—any list—and the method
swaps the indexed elements. There is no type parameter to worry about. As a rule,
if a type parameter appears only once in a method declaration, replace it with
a wildcard. If it’s an unbounded type parameter, replace it with an unbounded
wildcard; if it’s a bounded type parameter, replace it with a bounded wildcard.
There’s one problem with the second declaration for swap. The straightfor-
ward implementation won’t compile:
public static void swap(List<?> list, int i, int j) {
list.set(i, list.set(j, list.get(i)));
}
Trying to compile it produces this less-than-helpful error message:
Swap.java:5: error: incompatible types: Object cannot be 
converted to CAP#1
        list.set(i, list.set(j, list.get(i)));
                                        ^
  where CAP#1 is a fresh type-variable:
    CAP#1 extends Object from capture of ?
It doesn’t seem right that we can’t put an element back into the list that we just
took it out of. The problem is that the type of list is List<?>, and you can’t put
any value except null into a List<?>. Fortunately, there is a way to implement
this method without resorting to an unsafe cast or a raw type. The idea is to write a