CHAPTER 9
GENERAL PROGRAMMING
266
If instead you use a nested for-each loop, the problem simply disappears. The
resulting code is as succinct as you could wish for:
// Preferred idiom for nested iteration on collections and arrays
for (Suit suit : suits)
for (Rank rank : ranks)
deck.add(new Card(suit, rank));
Unfortunately, there are three common situations where you can’t use for-each:
• Destructive filtering—If you need to traverse a collection removing selected
elements, then you need to use an explicit iterator so that you can call its
remove method. You can often avoid explicit traversal by using Collection’s
removeIf method, added in Java 8.
• Transforming—If you need to traverse a list or array and replace some or all
of the values of its elements, then you need the list iterator or array index in
order to replace the value of an element.
• Parallel iteration—If you need to traverse multiple collections in parallel,
then you need explicit control over the iterator or index variable so that all it-
erators or index variables can be advanced in lockstep (as demonstrated unin-
tentionally in the buggy card and dice examples above).
If you find yourself in any of these situations, use an ordinary for loop and be
wary of the traps mentioned in this item.
Not only does the for-each loop let you iterate over collections and arrays, it
lets you iterate over any object that implements the Iterable interface, which
consists of a single method. Here is how the interface looks:
public interface Iterable<E> {
// Returns an iterator over the elements in this iterable
Iterator<E> iterator();
}
It is a bit tricky to implement Iterable if you have to write your own Iterator
implementation from scratch, but if you are writing a type that represents a group
of elements, you should strongly consider having it implement Iterable, even if
you choose not to have it implement Collection. This will allow your users to
iterate over your type using the for-each loop, and they will be forever grateful.
In summary, the for-each loop provides compelling advantages over the
traditional for loop in clarity, flexibility, and bug prevention, with no performance
penalty. Use for-each loops in preference to for loops wherever you can.