ITEM 50: MAKE DEFENSIVE COPIES WHEN NEEDED
233
thread during the window of vulnerability between the time the parameters are
checked and the time they are copied. In the computer security community, this is
known as a time-of-check/time-of-use or TOCTOU attack [Viega01].
Note also that we did not use Date’s clone method to make the defensive
copies. Because Date is nonfinal, the clone method is not guaranteed to return an
object whose class is java.util.Date: it could return an instance of an untrusted
subclass that is specifically designed for malicious mischief. Such a subclass
could, for example, record a reference to each instance in a private static list at the
time of its creation and allow the attacker to access this list. This would give the
attacker free rein over all instances. To prevent this sort of attack, do not use the
clone method to make a defensive copy of a parameter whose type is sub-
classable by untrusted parties.
While the replacement constructor successfully defends against the previous
attack, it is still possible to mutate a Period instance, because its accessors offer
access to its mutable internals:
// Second attack on the internals of a Period instance
Date start = new Date();
Date end = new Date();
Period p = new Period(start, end);
p.end().setYear(78);  // Modifies internals of p!
To defend against the second attack, merely modify the accessors to return
defensive copies of mutable internal fields:
// Repaired accessors - make defensive copies of internal fields
public Date start() {
return new Date(start.getTime());
}
public Date end() {
return new Date(end.getTime());
}
With the new constructor and the new accessors in place, Period is truly
immutable. No matter how malicious or incompetent a programmer, there is sim-
ply no way to violate the invariant that the start of a period does not follow its end
(without resorting to extralinguistic means such as native methods and reflection).
This is true because there is no way for any class other than Period itself to gain
access to either of the mutable fields in a Period instance. These fields are truly
encapsulated within the object.