ITEM 68: ADHERE TO GENERALLY ACCEPTED NAMING CONVENTIONS
289
Item 68: Adhere to generally accepted naming conventions 
The Java platform has a well-established set of naming conventions, many of which
are contained in The Java Language Specification [JLS, 6.1]. Loosely speaking,
naming conventions fall into two categories: typographical and grammatical. 
There are only a handful of typographical naming conventions, covering
packages, classes, interfaces, methods, fields, and type variables. You should
rarely violate them and never without a very good reason. If an API violates these
conventions, it may be difficult to use. If an implementation violates them, it may
be difficult to maintain. In both cases, violations have the potential to confuse and
irritate other programmers who work with the code and can cause faulty assump-
tions that lead to errors. The conventions are summarized in this item.
Package and module names should be hierarchical with the components
separated by periods. Components should consist of lowercase alphabetic
characters and, rarely, digits. The name of any package that will be used outside
your organization should begin with your organization’s Internet domain name
with the components reversed, for example, edu.cmu, com.google, org.eff. The
standard libraries and optional packages, whose names begin with java and
javax, are exceptions to this rule. Users must not create packages or modules
whose names begin with java or javax. Detailed rules for converting Internet
domain names to package name prefixes can be found in the JLS [JLS, 6.1].
The remainder of a package name should consist of one or more components
describing the package. Components should be short, generally eight or fewer
characters. Meaningful abbreviations are encouraged, for example, util rather
than utilities. Acronyms are acceptable, for example, awt. Components should
generally consist of a single word or abbreviation. 
Many packages have names with just one component in addition to the Internet
domain name. Additional components are appropriate for large facilities whose
size demands that they be broken up into an informal hierarchy. For example, the
javax.util package has a rich hierarchy of packages with names such as
java.util.concurrent.atomic. Such packages are known as subpackages,
although there is almost no linguistic support for package hierarchies.
Class and interface names, including enum and annotation type names, should
consist of one or more words, with the first letter of each word capitalized, for
example, List or FutureTask. Abbreviations are to be avoided, except for
acronyms and certain common abbreviations like max and min. There is some
disagreement as to whether acronyms should be uppercase or have only their first
letter capitalized. While some programmers still use uppercase, a strong argument