CHAPTER 7
LAMBDAS AND STREAMS
194
Lambdas are similar in function to anonymous classes, but far more concise.
Here’s how the code snippet above looks with the anonymous class replaced by a
lambda. The boilerplate is gone, and the behavior is clearly evident:
// Lambda expression as function object (replaces anonymous class)
Collections.sort(words,
(s1, s2) -> Integer.compare(s1.length(), s2.length()));
Note that the types of the lambda (Comparator<String>), of its parameters
(s1 and s2, both String), and of its return value (int) are not present in the code.
The compiler deduces these types from context, using a process known as type
inference. In some cases, the compiler won’t be able to determine the types, and
you’ll have to specify them. The rules for type inference are complex: they take up
an entire chapter in the JLS [JLS, 18]. Few programmers understand these rules in
detail, but that’s OK. Omit the types of all lambda parameters unless their
presence makes your program clearer. If the compiler generates an error telling
you it can’t infer the type of a lambda parameter, then specify it. Sometimes you
may have to cast the return value or the entire lambda expression, but this is rare.
One caveat should be added concerning type inference. Item 26 tells you not
to use raw types, Item 29 tells you to favor generic types, and Item 30 tells you to
favor generic methods. This advice is doubly important when you’re using
lambdas, because the compiler obtains most of the type information that allows it
to perform type inference from generics. If you don’t provide this information, the
compiler will be unable to do type inference, and you’ll have to specify types
manually in your lambdas, which will greatly increase their verbosity. By way of
example, the code snippet above won’t compile if the variable words is declared to
be of the raw type List instead of the parameterized type List<String>.
Incidentally, the comparator in the snippet can be made even more succinct if
a comparator construction method is used in place of a lambda (Items 14. 43):
Collections.sort(words, comparingInt(String::length));
In fact, the snippet can be made still shorter by taking advantage of the sort
method that was added to the List interface in Java 8:
 words.sort(comparingInt(String::length));
The addition of lambdas to the language makes it practical to use function
objects where it would not previously have made sense. For example, consider the
Operation enum type in Item 34. Because each enum required different behavior
for its apply method, we used constant-specific class bodies and overrode the
apply method in each enum constant. To refresh your memory, here is the code: