ITEM 18: FAVOR COMPOSITION OVER INHERITANCE
89
result in self-use, which is difficult, time-consuming, error-prone, and may reduce
performance. Additionally, it isn’t always possible because some methods cannot
be implemented without access to private fields inaccessible to the subclass.
A related cause of fragility in subclasses is that their superclass can acquire
new methods in subsequent releases. Suppose a program depends for its security
on the fact that all elements inserted into some collection satisfy some predicate.
This can be guaranteed by subclassing the collection and overriding each method
capable of adding an element to ensure that the predicate is satisfied before adding
the element. This works fine until a new method capable of inserting an element is
added to the superclass in a subsequent release. Once this happens, it becomes
possible to add an “illegal” element merely by invoking the new method, which is
not overridden in the subclass. This is not a purely theoretical problem. Several
security holes of this nature had to be fixed when Hashtable and Vector were ret-
rofitted to participate in the Collections Framework.
Both of these problems stem from overriding methods. You might think that it
is safe to extend a class if you merely add new methods and refrain from
overriding existing methods. While this sort of extension is much safer, it is not
without risk. If the superclass acquires a new method in a subsequent release and
you have the bad luck to have given the subclass a method with the same signature
and a different return type, your subclass will no longer compile [JLS, 8.4.8.3]. If
you’ve given the subclass a method with the same signature and return type as the
new superclass method, then you’re now overriding it, so you’re subject to the
problems described earlier. Furthermore, it is doubtful that your method will
fulfill the contract of the new superclass method, because that contract had not yet
been written when you wrote the subclass method.
Luckily, there is a way to avoid all of the problems described above. Instead of
extending an existing class, give your new class a private field that references an
instance of the existing class. This design is called composition because the exist-
ing class becomes a component of the new one. Each instance method in the new
class invokes the corresponding method on the contained instance of the existing
class and returns the results. This is known as forwarding, and the methods in the
new class are known as forwarding methods. The resulting class will be rock
solid, with no dependencies on the implementation details of the existing class.
Even adding new methods to the existing class will have no impact on the new
class. To make this concrete, here’s a replacement for InstrumentedHashSet that
uses the composition-and-forwarding approach. Note that the implementation is
broken into two pieces, the class itself and a reusable forwarding class, which
contains all of the forwarding methods and nothing else: