ITEM 7: ELIMINATE OBSOLETE OBJECT REFERENCES
27
increased garbage collector activity or increased memory footprint. In extreme
cases, such memory leaks can cause disk paging and even program failure with an
OutOfMemoryError, but such failures are relatively rare.
So where is the memory leak? If a stack grows and then shrinks, the objects
that were popped off the stack will not be garbage collected, even if the program
using the stack has no more references to them. This is because the stack main-
tains obsolete references to these objects. An obsolete reference is simply a refer-
ence that will never be dereferenced again. In this case, any references outside of
the “active portion” of the element array are obsolete. The active portion consists
of the elements whose index is less than size.
Memory leaks in garbage-collected languages (more properly known as unin-
tentional object retentions) are insidious. If an object reference is unintentionally
retained, not only is that object excluded from garbage collection, but so too are
any objects referenced by that object, and so on. Even if only a few object refer-
ences are unintentionally retained, many, many objects may be prevented from
being garbage collected, with potentially large effects on performance.
The fix for this sort of problem is simple: null out references once they
become obsolete. In the case of our Stack class, the reference to an item becomes
obsolete as soon as it’s popped off the stack. The corrected version of the pop
method looks like this:
public Object pop() {
if (size == 0)
throw new EmptyStackException();
Object result = elements[--size];
elements[size] = null; // Eliminate obsolete reference
return result;
}
An added benefit of nulling out obsolete references is that if they are subse-
quently dereferenced by mistake, the program will immediately fail with a
NullPointerException, rather than quietly doing the wrong thing. It is always
beneficial to detect programming errors as quickly as possible.
When programmers are first stung by this problem, they may overcompensate
by nulling out every object reference as soon as the program is finished using it.
This is neither necessary nor desirable; it clutters up the program unnecessarily.
Nulling out object references should be the exception rather than the norm.
The best way to eliminate an obsolete reference is to let the variable that contained
the reference fall out of scope. This occurs naturally if you define each variable in
the narrowest possible scope (Item 57).