ITEM 67: OPTIMIZE JUDICIOUSLY
287
Consider the performance consequences of your API design decisions.
Making a public type mutable may require a lot of needless defensive copying
(Item 50). Similarly, using inheritance in a public class where composition would
have been appropriate ties the class forever to its superclass, which can place
artificial limits on the performance of the subclass (Item 18). As a final example,
using an implementation type rather than an interface in an API ties you to a
specific implementation, even though faster implementations may be written in
the future (Item 64). 
The effects of API design on performance are very real. Consider the getSize
method in the java.awt.Component class. The decision that this performance-
critical method was to return a Dimension instance, coupled with the decision that
Dimension instances are mutable, forces any implementation of this method to
allocate a new Dimension instance on every invocation. Even though allocating
small objects is inexpensive on a modern VM, allocating millions of objects
needlessly can do real harm to performance. 
Several API design alternatives existed. Ideally, Dimension should have been
immutable (Item 17); alternatively, getSize could have been replaced by two
methods returning the individual primitive components of a Dimension object. In
fact, two such methods were added to Component in Java 2 for performance
reasons. Preexisting client code, however, still uses the getSize method and still
suffers the performance consequences of the original API design decisions.
Luckily, it is generally the case that good API design is consistent with good
performance. It is a very bad idea to warp an API to achieve good perfor-
mance. The performance issue that caused you to warp the API may go away in a
future release of the platform or other underlying software, but the warped API
and the support headaches that come with it will be with you forever.
Once you’ve carefully designed your program and produced a clear, concise,
and well-structured implementation, then it may be time to consider optimization,
assuming you’re not already satisfied with the performance of the program. 
Recall that Jackson’s two rules of optimization were “Don’t do it,” and “(for
experts only). Don’t do it yet.” He could have added one more: measure perfor-
mance before and after each attempted optimization. You may be surprised by
what you find. Often, attempted optimizations have no measurable effect on per-
formance; sometimes, they make it worse. The main reason is that it’s difficult to
guess where your program is spending its time. The part of the program that you
think is slow may not be at fault, in which case you’d be wasting your time trying
to optimize it. Common wisdom says that programs spend 90 percent of their time
in 10 percent of their code.