ITEM 45: USE STREAMS JUDICIOUSLY
209
requires computing all the pairs of elements that can be chosen from two sets.
Mathematicians call this the Cartesian product of the two sets. Here’s an iterative
implementation with a nested for-each loop that should look very familiar to you:
// Iterative Cartesian product computation
private static List<Card> newDeck() {
    List<Card> result = new ArrayList<>();
    for (Suit suit : Suit.values())
        for (Rank rank : Rank.values())
            result.add(new Card(suit, rank));
    return result;
}
And here is a stream-based implementation that makes use of the intermediate
operation flatMap. This operation maps each element in a stream to a stream and
then concatenates all of these new streams into a single stream (or flattens them).
Note that this implementation contains a nested lambda, shown in boldface:
// Stream-based Cartesian product computation
private static List<Card> newDeck() {
    return Stream.of(Suit.values())
        .flatMap(suit ->
            Stream.of(Rank.values())
                .map(rank -> new Card(suit, rank)))
        .collect(toList());
}
Which of the two versions of newDeck is better? It boils down to personal
preference and the environment in which you’re programming. The first version is
simpler and perhaps feels more natural. A larger fraction of Java programmers
will be able to understand and maintain it, but some programmers will feel more
comfortable with the second (stream-based) version. It’s a bit more concise and
not too difficult to understand if you’re reasonably well-versed in streams and
functional programming. If you’re not sure which version you prefer, the iterative
version is probably the safer choice. If you prefer the stream version and you
believe that other programmers who will work with the code will share your pref-
erence, then you should use it.
In summary, some tasks are best accomplished with streams, and others with
iteration. Many tasks are best accomplished by combining the two approaches.
There are no hard and fast rules for choosing which approach to use for a task, but
there are some useful heuristics. In many cases, it will be clear which approach to
use; in some cases, it won’t. If you’re not sure whether a task is better served
by streams or iteration, try both and see which works better.